Thank you for downloading this
Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send
you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your
inbox.

Did You Know That…

Most record deals don’t require the record company even to make a record,
much less to release it?
You don’t have to register in Washington to get a copyright?
If we write a song together, and you write only the lyrics and I write only the
music, each of us owns a piece of the music and each of us owns a piece of
the lyrics? And that neither of us can use just the music, or just the lyrics,
without paying the other?
Prior to 1972, the United States had no copyright law prohibiting the
unauthorized reproduction of records?
Some lm music composers can’t even write music, much less create the
arrangements for each instrument of an orchestra?
A brain surgeon and a rock star have something in common?

To my precious Shana, and our growing family: Danny,
Soundis, David, Rona, Josh, Lindsey, Jordan, Dorianne,
Benjamin, Talia, Billy, Noa, Leo, Helen, Grae, and Judah.

Acknowledgments

Please read my thank-yous. I know it’s a bunch of people you’ve probably never
heard of, but think how much you’d want other people to read it if your name was
here.
No creative work is ever the product of one person alone (no matter how
tempting it is to believe my own hype), so I want to acknowledge and thank all
the following people for their inspiration and help:
Payson Wol and Bruce Ramer, my mentors and spiritual brothers.
Bea Shaw, my mommy, who helped edit the rst edition, and who paid for
my rst soft-drink stand.
Snu Garrett, for believing in me early on.
Mike Gorfaine and R. Diane McKain, for their invaluable advice on lm
and TV music.
Gene Salomon, for his invaluable input and strategic thinking (“always
study the endgame”).
Ethan Schi res, the rock star lawyer.
Rob Light, for help with the touring section.
Ed Ritvo, for the con dence to do all sorts of things.
Larry Apolzon and Steve Bigger, for help with protecting the rights in
names.
Peter Anderson, for the copyright infringement section.
Dave Dunton (in the very beginning) and Stephanie Frerich, for getting this
book into the hands of readers.
Alan Garner, for his extraordinary communication skills and advice on
conversation, books, and salesmanship.

Kim Mitchell, my incredibly indispensable assistant.
Jules Levine and Corky, for having bulldogs.
Michael Cannon Jr., for his cleverness in updating the royalty chart.
In addition, the following people (in alphabetical order) generously shared
their expertise: David Altschul, Jill Berliner, Don Biederman, Kevin Breen,
Nancy Chapman, David Cohen, Gary Cohen, Glenn Delgado, Bruce
Eisenberg, Steven Fabrizio, Gary Ford, Russell Frackman, Dell Furano, Steve
Gawley, Neil Gillis, Mark Goldstein, Lauren Gordon, Trudy Green, Je Hill,
Zach Horowitz, Cathy Jacobson, Howard Kaufman, Larry Kenswil, Steve
Lyon, Jay Morgenstern, Jay Murray, Michael Ostro , Ed Pierson, Peter
Reichardt, Bruce Resniko , Jack Rosner, Tom Ross, Joe Salvo, Rose Schwartz,
Joel Sill, Patricia Smith, Lon Sobel, Mike Steinberg, Sandy Tanaka, Lance
Tendler, Ray Tisdale, Tracie Verlinde, Wayne Volat, Lenny Waronker, and Ron
Wilcox.
For this eleventh edition, special thanks to (alphabetically): Peter Anderson,
Larry Apolzon, Ed Arrow, Lenny Beer, Andrew Bergman, Josh Binder, Jason
Boyarksi, Peter Brodsky, Tom Cavanaugh, Justin Eshak, Jake Fain, Elena
Falloon, Richard Feldstein, Steve Gawley, Susan Genco, Dan Getz, Nicole
Giacco, Lee Goforth, Gary Greenberg, Alex Grout, Michael Gubman, Je
Harleston, Mike Huppe, David Israelite, Celine Joshua, Jason Kawejsza,
Albrecht Klutmann, David Kokakis, Michael Kushner, Imran Majid, Nancy
Marcus-Seklir, Diane McKain, Josh Neuman, David Nieman, David Nimmer,
Lonny Olinick, Julian Petty, Lauri Rechardt, Berkeley Rheinhold, Paul
Robinson, Bobby Rosenbloum, Jacqueline Saturn, Steve Schnur, Moe Shalizi,
Lori Silfen, Alex Stolls, Helen Stotler, Amy Thompson, Ashford Tucker, Diane
van Beekum-de Mooij, Ed Vetri, James Weinberger, Pat Woods, and Matt
Young.

IMPORTANT
The materials in this book represent the opinions of the author and may not be
applicable to all situations. Many circumstances appear similar, but di er in
respects that may be legally signi cant. In addition, laws and customs change
over time, and by necessity of the lapse in time between the writing and
printing of this book, some aspects may be out of date even upon rst
publication. Accordingly, the author and publisher assume no responsibility for
actions taken by readers based upon the advice o ered in this book. Each reader
should use caution in applying any material contained in this book to his or her
speci c circumstance, and should seek the advice of an appropriate professional.
(Author’s note: Use your common sense and be careful!)

1
First Steps

STATE OF THE UNION
Welcome to the eleventh edition.
And for you Spinal Tap fans, “This one goes to Eleven” (if you have no idea
what the hell I’m talking about, Google it).
I have lots of new goodies for you since we last got together, such as the
dominance of streaming, why artists have more power than ever in history, the
emergence of music created by arti cial intelligence (some argue that’s been
going on since the beginning of stoner rock), how TikTok has majorly rocked
the music world (and whether that’s good or bad), the recent mega-sales of
music catalogs, music in Web3/metaverse/NFTs, and of course updated
numbers and practices.
Piracy slaughtered the music business in the 2000s, as U.S. music revenues
plummeted from their high of $14.6 billion in 1999 to half of that, and they
stayed stagnant or steadily declined for sixteen years. But thanks to streaming,
we’re now booming, having hit an all-time high of $15.9 billion in 2022, and
still growing healthily. Streaming is clearly the savior, but in the process, it
changed the music biz more radically in the last few years than at any other time
in its history.
Let me explain:
First, of course, there was a massive change in how music is delivered. Since
the 1890s, music has been monetized by selling something: wax cylinders,

piano rolls, shellac records, vinyl records, cassettes, CDs, and cheesy
merchandise (well, I guess we’re still doing that). Today, the business is no
longer based primarily on sales of physical goods (though they still exist), but
rather on Spotify, Apple Music, TikTok, Amazon Music, YouTube, and similar
services.
Second, this change goes WAY beyond the way you get your music.
Consider this:
1. In the past, when record sales were the mainstay of the recorded music
business, you could go to a record store and buy two or three records at a
time. Today, you can only stream one song at a time. That may not seem
like a big deal, but…
2. In the days of physical goods, an artist was paid the same money for each
record sold, regardless of whether a buyer listened to it a thousand times
or never took it out of the shrink-wrap and used it as a doorstop. But
today, the more listens you have, the more money you make (I’ll explain
how later). However…
3. In the old days, if my records sold big numbers, it didn’t make any
di erence to the number of sales you had. Your fans would buy your
albums, and my fans would buy mine. In fact, if you had a big seller, it
would bring a lot of people into record stores, and that increased the
chances of selling my records. But in the streaming world, that’s no
longer true. For reasons we’ll discuss later, the more listens you get, the
less money I make. A truly radical change.
Streaming has delivered us from the jaws of despair. As I said a minute ago,
we beat the industry’s 1999 revenue record when we hit $15.9 billion in 2022,
and that’s really awesome except for the pesky little fact that in 1999 gasoline
was $1.68 per gallon. But even adjusting for in ation, I predict the industry is
going to be bigger than it’s ever been in history. Why?
In 1999, the historical peak of the music biz, an average CD buyer spent
about $40 to $50 per year on CDs; let’s call it $45. Today, with subscriptions
priced at $10 per month, the average per-subscriber fee is about $7 (because of

student and family discounts). So let’s use $7 per month, which means a music
fan spends about $84 per year. The $45 in 1999 is worth about $72 today
(according to my deep research of two minutes to nd a chart on the Internet),
so at $84 in today’s dollars, we’re already ahead of the $72 equivalent for CD
purchases that we got from fans in the good ol’ days. On top of that, the
number of subscribers is growing all over the world. And subscription fees are
going up.
But wait… there’s more! In the heyday of the music biz, the average CD
buyer stopped going to record stores (or even listening to much music) in their
early twenties. Today, people of all ages subscribe to streaming services (oldsters
listen to classic rock or Frank Sinatra, and toddlers want stu like “Baby Shark,”
a song that can mercilessly eat your brain). Which means streaming is not only
generating more money per user (the $84 vs. $72 in the above example), but it’s
also bringing in a wider range of consumers than ever before. How can the
industry not be bigger than ever?
This digital revolution also allows artists to get their music directly to fans
without a record label being a gatekeeper. That levels the playing eld and gives
more power to artists, who can generate a substantial buzz on their own, then
decide if they even need a record company. We’ll talk about all that in detail.
And that’s just a taste of what’s waiting for you inside the tent.
So step right up, folks. No need to push, there’s room for everyone, as we
explore how the music business is shifting around like a Rubik’s cube. Hang on
to your hats, glasses, and small children.

OPEN UP AND SAY “AHHH”
For many years I taught a class on the music business at the University of
Southern California Law School’s Advanced Professional Program. The class
was for lawyers, accountants, record and lm company executives, managers,
agents, and bartenders who wanted to manage groups. Anyway, at the
beginning of one of these courses a friend of mine came up to me. She was an
executive at a lm studio and was taking the class to understand the music biz as

it relates to lms. She said, “I’m here to open up the top of my head and have
you pour in the music business.”
I loved that mental picture (because there’s a lot of stu I’d love to learn that
way), and it spurred me to develop a painless way of infusing you with the
extensive materials in this book. So if you’ll sit back, relax, and open up your
mind, I’ll pour in all you need to know about the music business (and a little
more for good measure).

HOW I GOT STARTED
I really love what I do. I’ve been practicing music law for over forty years, and I
represent recording artists, songwriters, producers, music publishers, lm music
composers, industry executives, record companies, lm companies, and other
assorted mutants that populate the biz.
I got into this gig on purpose, because I’ve always loved creative arts. My rst
showbiz experience was in grade school, performing magic tricks for assemblies.
I also started playing accordion in grade school. (I used to play a mean
accordion; everyone applauded when I shook the bellows on “Lady of Spain.” I
gave it up because I found it impossible to romance a girl while wearing an
accordion.) In high school, I graduated from accordion to guitar, and in college
at the University of Texas, I played lead guitar in a band called Oedipus and the
Mothers. While I was with Oedipus, we recorded a demo that I tried to sell to
our family friend, Snu Garrett (more about him later). Snu , a powerful
record producer, very kindly took the time to meet with me. That meeting was
a major turning point in my life. Snu listened to the record, smiled, and said,
“Don… go to law school.”
So I took Snu ’s advice and went to Harvard Law School. While I was there,
I played lead guitar with a band called the Rhythm Method. But it was quickly
becoming clear that my ability to be in the music business and eat regularly lay
along the business path. When I graduated, I rst did tax planning for
entertainers. Tax law, like intricate puzzles, was a lot of fun, but when I
discovered there was such a thing as music law, the electricity really turned on.
In fact, I took the USC class that I later taught, and it got me so excited that I

left the tax practice for my current rm. Doing music law was so much fun that
it wasn’t even like working (I’m still not over that feeling), and I enjoyed it so
much that I felt guilty getting paid (I got over that).
My rst entertainment law experience was representing a six-foot model
who was referred to me by my dentist. I promised him I would return the favor,
since most of my clients had teeth. The model was being pursued (I suspect in
every way) by a manager who wanted a contract for 50% of her gross earnings
for ten years. (You’ll see how absurd this is when you get to Chapter 3.) Even
then, I knew this wasn’t right, so I nervously called up the guy to negotiate. I
still remember my voice cracking as I said his proposal was over the industry
standard, since most managers took only 15% (which was true). He retorted
with “Oh yeah? Who?” Well, he had me. I wasn’t really sure what managers did,
much less who they were. So I learned my rst lesson in the art of humility.
As I began to really understand how the music business worked, I found that
my love of both creative arts and business allowed me to move between the two
worlds and help them relate to each other. The marriage of art and commerce
has always fascinated me—they can’t exist without each other—yet the concept
of creative freedom and the need to control costs in order to have a business are
eternally locked in a Vulcan death match. Which means the music business will
always need lawyers.
Anyway, I now channel my creative energies into innovative business deals,
and I satisfy my need to perform by teaching, lecturing, and playing guitar. Just
to be sure I don’t get too straight, however, I cycle through my weird
assortment of hobbies: magic, ham radio, weight lifting, guitar, dog training,
ve-string banjo, karate, chess, poker, backgammon, and real estate investment.
I also write novels, which you are all required to buy.

BRAIN SURGERY
Speaking of marrying creativity and business, I’ve discovered that a rock star
and a brain surgeon have something in common. It’s not that either one would
be particularly good at the other’s job (and I’m not sure which crossover would
produce the more disastrous results), but rather that each one is capable of

performing their craft brilliantly, and generating huge sums of money, without
the need for any nancial skills. In most businesses, before you can start earning
big bucks, you have to be pretty well schooled in how the business works. For
example, if you open up a shoe store, you have to work up a budget, negotiate a
lease, bargain for the price of the shoes, and so forth—all before you smell that
rst foot. But in entertainment, as in surgery, you can soar to the top without
any business expertise.
Making a living from a business you don’t understand is risky. Yet a large
number of artists, including major ones, have never learned such basics as how
record royalties are computed, what a copyright is, how music publishing
works, and a number of other things that directly a ect their lives. They don’t
know this stu because (a) their time was better spent making music; (b) they
weren’t interested; (c) it sounded too complicated; and/or (d) learning it was
too much like being in school. But without knowing these basics, it’s impossible
to understand the di erent aspects of their professional lives. And as their
success grows, and their lives get more complex, they get even more lost.
While it’s true that some artists refuse to even listen to business talk (I’ve
watched them go into sensory shutdown if you so much as mention the topic),
others get very interested and study every detail of their business lives. The vast
majority, however, are somewhere in the middle. They don’t really enjoy
business, but they want to participate intelligently in their career decisions.
These artists are smart enough to know one simple thing: No one ever takes as
good care of your business as you do.
It was for my moderately to seriously interested clients that I developed a
way to explain the basics in simple, everyday language. With only a small
investment of time, these clients understood the essential concepts, and
everyone enjoyed the process (including me). It also made an enormous
di erence in the artist’s self-con dence about his or her business life, and
allowed them to make valuable contributions to the process.
Because the results of these learning sessions were so positive, several clients
asked if we could explore the subjects more deeply. Thus the conception of this
book. I had just nished teaching my class on the music biz at USC and realized

that my class notes were the outline of a book. So after some additional research
to esh it out, I sat down and knocked out the rst edition.
The book is designed to give you a general overview of the music industry.
You can read it as casually or intensely as suits your interest level, attention
span, and pain tolerance. It’s not written for lawyers or technicians, so it doesn’t
include the minutiae you’ll nd in a textbook for professionals. Instead, it gives
you a broad overview of each segment of the industry, then goes into enough
detail for you to understand the major issues you’re likely to confront.

JUNGLE MAPS
When I was in high school, a policeman named O cer Sparks spoke at an
assembly. Mr. Sparks hyped us on the life of a crime ghter, seeming sure we all
secretly wanted to be cops. In the process, he showed us something I’ll never
forget.
O cer Sparks ran a lm in which the camera moved along a street of retail
shops. It was a grainy black-and-white movie, only about thirty seconds long,
lmed by a camera bobbing along a sidewalk. When it was nished, he asked if
we’d seen anything unusual. No one had. Apart from a couple of people
bouncing in and out of the doorways, it looked pretty much like pictures taken
by a camera walking past a row of boring stores. Mr. Sparks then said that a
“trained observer” who watched the lm could spot six crimes being
committed. He showed the lm again and pointed out each of the incidents
(there was a quiet exchange of drugs, a pickpocket, etc.). This time, the crimes
were obvious. And I felt like a doofus for missing them.
Any time I learn a new skill, I go through a similar process. At rst, things
either look deceptively simple, or like a bewildering blur of chaos. But as I learn
what to look for, I see a world I never knew was there.
From my experience, the best way to become a “trained observer” is to have a
guide to the basics—a framework in which to organize the bits and pieces. So
that’s the purpose of this book—to be a map through the jungle, and show you
where the crimes are. (O cer Sparks, if you’re out there somewhere, I hope
you’re proud.)

DETAILS
There is no way one book (even one lling several volumes) could poke into
every nook and cranny of a business as complicated as the music business. So the
goal here is to give you the big picture, not all the details. (Besides, for some of
those details, I charge serious money.) Also, even if I tried to lay out all the little
pieces, as fast as everything moves in this biz, the book would be obsolete within
a few months. In other words, the idea is to give you a broad overview (which
doesn’t change nearly as quickly, or at least it didn’t until the entire business had
an earthquake started by piracy and ending with streaming). The idea is to give
you a tree on which to hang the leaves of your own experience. Oddly, it’s easier
to pick up details (from the Internet, gossip at cocktail parties, etc.) than it is to
learn the structural overview, because few people have the time or patience to sit
down and give it to you. In fact, giving you the overall view turned out to be a
massively bigger job than I thought when I started. But you’re worth it.

SOME RESULTS
Since this is the eleventh edition, I now have feedback from experiments using
this book on actual human subjects. Of all the responses I got, I thought you
might enjoy hearing about two in particular:
First, I received an irate call from a music lawyer, who was upset because he
charged thousands of dollars to give clients the advice I had put in the book.
Second, I received an equally irate call from a manager, who said that most
of the artists he’d approached kept pushing my book in his face.
Way to go! Keep shoving.
And if you’ll permit me a momentary lapse of modesty, my favorite
compliment was from someone who said this was the rst book he’d ever
nished in his life.

STAPLE, SPINDLE, AND MUTILATE

When you go through this book, forget everything you learned as a kid about
taking good care of books, treating them as sacred works of art, etc. Read this
book with a pencil or highlighter in your hand. Circle or star passages you think
you’ll need, fold over pages, mark them with Post-its, paper clips, or bong water
—whatever helps (unless you’re reading an electronic edition, in which case
you might want to lose the bong water). This is an action book—a set of
directions on how to jog through the music biz without getting mugged. So
treat it like a comfortable old pair of shoes that you don’t mind getting dirty. It
doesn’t matter what they look like, as long as they get you where you’re going.

CHOOSE YOUR OWN ADVENTURE
When my sons, David, Josh, and Jordan, were little, their favorite books were
from a series called Choose Your Own Adventure. They work like this: You
start reading the book on page one, and after a few pages, the author gives you a
choice. For example, if you want Pinocchio to go down the alley, you turn to
page fourteen, but if you want him to go to school, you turn to page nineteen
(my boys never picked school). From there, every few pages you have more
choices, and there are several di erent endings to the book. (The boys liked the
ending where everyone gets killed, but that’s another story.) These books are
not meant to be read straight through; if you tried, you’d nd yourself crashing
into di erent plots and stories. Instead, you’re supposed to skip around,
following a new path each time.
This concept gave me the idea of how to organize this book. You have a
choice of reading for a broad overview or reading in depth, and the book tells
you where to skip ahead if you want to do the former. However, unlike the
Choose Your Own Adventure books, you can read straight through with little
or no damage to the central nervous system.
Here’s how it’s organized:
Part I deals with how to put together a team to guide your career, consisting
of a personal manager, business manager, agent, and attorney.

Part II looks at record deals, including the concepts of royalties, advances,
and other deal points.
Part III talks about songwriting and publishing, including copyrights and
the structure of the publishing industry, as well as a section on protecting
your name from people who want to pirate it.
Part IV explores things you’ll need to know if you’re a group.
Part V deals with concerts and touring, including agreements for personal
appearances and the role of your various team members in the process.
Part VI, on merchandising, tells you how to pro t from plastering your face
on posters, T-shirts, and other junk.
Parts VII and VIII explore classical music and motion pictures. They’re the
last sections because you need to understand all the other concepts before
we can tackle them.
Now, to choosing your adventure. You have four mouthwatering ways to go
through this book:
1. EXTREMELY FAST TRACK
If you really want a quick trip, then:
(a) Read Part I, on how to pick a team of advisors;
(b) Get people who know what they’re doing;
(c) Let them do it;
(d) Put this book on your shelf to impress your friends; and
(e) Say “Hi” to me backstage at one of your concerts.
2. FAST TRACK
Short of this radical approach, if you want a broad-strokes overview of
the business, without much detail, skip ahead each time you see the
FAST TRACK directions.
3. ADVANCED OVERVIEW
If you want a more in-depth look, but less than the full shot, then follow
the ADVANCED OVERVIEW directions. This will give you a solid
overview, plus some detail on each topic.

4. EXPERT TRACK
For you high achievers who want an in-depth discussion, simply read
straight through.
Feel free to mix and match any of these tracks. If a particular topic grabs your
interest, keep reading and check out the details. (Amazingly, topics that grab
your interest tend to be things currently happening in your life.) If another
topic is a yawn, Fast Track through it.
So let’s get going. Everybody starts with Part I.

PART I

Your Team of Advisors

2
How to Pick a Team

GETTING YOUR TEAM TOGETHER
Let’s talk about the professionals you’ll need to maximize your career and net
worth. The main players are your:
1. Personal manager
2. Attorney
3. Business manager
4. Agency
We’ll take a close look at each of these folks, but rst… a message from our
sponsor:

BUSINESS PHILOSOPHY
Before we get into the speci c players, let me share a bit of personal philosophy.
(If “share” is too California for you, try “Let me tell you some of my personal
philosophy,” or the New York equivalent, “Yo, listen up, I’m talkin’ to you.”)
Take a hard look at some facts:
1. You are a business.
Even though your skills are creative, you’re capable of generating
multimillions of dollars, so you have to think of yourself as a business.

2. Most artists don’t like business.
This isn’t to say you aren’t good at it. Some artists are unbelievably astute
in business. However, those folks are the minority, and whatever their
love and skill for business, their love and skill for creating and
performing are much bigger. So even if you’ve got the chops to handle
your own business, it’s not always the best use of your time.
3. Success hides a multitude of sins.
This is true in any business, from making widgets to making music. If
you’re successful, you can get away with sloppy operations that would
bankrupt you if times were bad. For example, putting all your pals on
the payroll, buying lots of non-income-producing assets (such as houses,
jets, and other things that cost you money to maintain), as well as an
overindulgence in various legal and illegal goodies, can easily result in a
crash and burn if your income takes even a small dip, much less a
nosedive. You can make more money by cutting costs than you can by
earning more income (see page 414 for proof of this), so the time to
operate e ciently is NOW, not later.
4. Your career is going to have a limited run.
Don’t take o ense at this—“limited” can mean anything from a year to
fty years, but it’s going to be limited. In most other careers, you can
expect to have a professional life of forty-years plus, but as an entertainer
in the music business, this rarely happens. And the road is strewn with
carcasses of aging rock stars who work for rent money on nostalgia tours.
So take the concentrated earnings of a few years and spread them over a
forty-year period, and you’ll nd that two things happen: (a) the
earnings don’t look quite as impressive; and (b) this money may have to
last you the rest of your life.
It’s certainly possible to have a long, healthy career, and to the extent you do,
the need for caution diminishes radically. However, even the best entertainers
have slumps, and very few have really long careers. So it’s best to plan as if your
career isn’t going to last, then be pleasantly surprised if it does. Setting yourself

up so that you never have to work doesn’t stop you from working all you like—
it just becomes an option, not an obligation.

HIRING A TEAM
The way you pick your professional team will either set up your career and
nances for life, or assure you a place on the next Electric Prunes tour. So be
very careful and pay attention personally to the process of assembling them. I
know you don’t like to deal with this stu , but it’s your career and your money,
and you have to do it every now and then. If you pick the right people, you can
set your life on automatic pilot and just check up on it periodically. If you pick
the wrong people and set it on automatic pilot, you’ll smash into a mountain
before you know what happened.

Pre-team Strategies
Since you wouldn’t open a store without something to sell, before you start
assembling a team, you want to be sure your music is ready for the big time.
And how do you know when it’s ready?
You ask your tummy. Do you believe, in your gut, that your music has
matured to the point that you’re ready for a professional career? If the answer is
yes, then you’re ready. (Tummies are reliable indicators once we learn how to
listen to them and dismiss the goblins that yell, “You’re a phony and nobody
wants you.” Even the superstars have these goblins; they’ve just learned to
ignore them.)
The rst thing is to record your music. The recording doesn’t have to be
expensive or elaborate—with the advent of relatively cheap computer software,
you can get a very professional sound in your bedroom. The important thing is
to capture your energy, enthusiasm, and drive. You know what I mean.
A word about what kind of music to make. It’s simple—you make the music
that moves your soul. No one has ever had a serious career by imitating others,
or trying to guess what the public wants. And I’ll tell you a secret: What the
public wants is someone whose music resonates from their heart. Doesn’t

matter whether you’re the commercial avor of the month, or an obscure blend
of reggae and Buddhist chants. All the superstars I’ve known have a clear vision
of who they are and what their music is.
Some artists try to create music that triggers the TikTok algorithm, hoping it
will help make their music go viral. Obviously, there’s no one formula (or else
everyone would do it), but for example, they might put the hook at the
beginning of the song to lower the skip rate (skip rate means the number of
people who listen to a few seconds of a song then hit “next”) or study how the
viral videos were shot to see what’s working visually. But in reality the only
thing that really works is a song that emotionally impacts the listener/viewer.
While you can’t fake that, or create it like a cake from a recipe, studying what’s
working online may help you put your music in the best possible frame by
seeing what visual or musical elements are getting massive attention.
Since this book’s last edition, the music business has become far more
democratic than ever in history. In the old days, record companies were
enormous gatekeepers (we’ll talk more about why on page 75), and without a
label’s clout, it was extremely di cult to get your records into stores (the only
place to buy music before Amazon and iTunes), or get radio airplay, or get on
TV. Today, record stores are virtually gone, and radio and TV mean far less.
You can also easily make your music available online, so your songs can be
judged by their own merit. That’s the good news. The bad news is that everyone
can put their music online, and as I write this, over a hundred thousand tracks
are uploaded every day. So how do you ever break through the crowd?
You have to build a fan base and keep them engaged (we’ll talk about how in
a minute). After that, your music either works or it doesn’t. Remember,
streaming services are driven by algorithms, and the more a song is listened to,
the more the algorithm pushes it. That’s because streaming services want their
listeners engaged, and they don’t really care what they’re listening to. So if you
catch re, it ares up fast. But if you don’t, your music lies there like that new
brand of dog food you tried out on Mu y.
So how exactly do you get fans (besides your Mom)?
A lot of bands start by playing local gigs. This is not only to attract fans, but
also to tighten up your musical chops and get experience playing live. When

you play, get fans to sign up for your email list at every show. A lot of artists
o er something as an incentive to build their lists. For example, everyone who
signs up gets a pin or sticker. Even if you only add a few new folks at each gig,
and a few here and there online, you can eventually build a following that helps
spread the word about your music and grows itself virally (assuming your music
doesn’t suck).
You also have to get your name and music out there on social media. For
example, one tool is Reddit, arguably the largest online community in this
space, and the leading “AMA” (Ask Me Anything) platform (a platform is a
place where online users connect, such as eBay, Amazon, TikTok, etc.). Hosting
your own Reddit page means posting about your news and songs, and the site
also lets you join in discussions on a wide range of topics beyond music, such as
art, gaming, or anything else that interests you.
Another technique to expand your fanbase is to connect with other artists
on Instagram or Twitter and start a tweety lovefest. Fans love to eavesdrop on
artists talking shop, and you can also get exposed to the other artists’ fans. If they
have a following, this makes their fans aware of you. Many artists o er a free
exclusive song to anyone who signs on to their email, SMS, or social lists for the
rst time. There’s software to capture email addresses in exchange for songs at
places like CASH Music (www.cashmusic.org), ConvertKit (formerly
FanBridge)
(www.convertkit.com/fanbridge),
and
Bandcamp
(https://bandcamp.com). Of the three, CASH Music has the advantage of being
open source (and free), as it’s based on the principle that everyone donates
resources and uses the platform to help other artists. You can also o er a song in
exchange for a fan post on Twitter, using “Tweet for a Track”
(www.tweetforatrack.com). I’m told Patreon (https://www.patreon.com) can
be useful in creating a relationship with your most hard-core fans (and
developing revenue opportunities with those folks). And check out blogs like
Hypebot for the latest and greatest DIY marketing and promotional tools in realtime.
Whatever you give away should feel high-end to your fans. “Free” shouldn’t
mean “no value.” It should mean the exact opposite. By giving away something
of substance, it draws the fanbase/database closer to you and your story. Create

unique content, such as exclusive video chats, early access to new recordings, or
exclusive videos of you in the studio. Maybe fans get a free ticket if they buy
one, or a chance to meet you after a gig, or you volunteer to help clean their
garage—well, maybe not the last one. Maybe you give out an epic live
recording, or an acoustic recording of your fanbase’s favorite song. Or if you’re
into the metaverse (more about that later), give them an NFT.
The idea is to share something meaningful and build a relationship with
your fans, but not look desperate (even if you are). So don’t just say “Free
tickets, take all you want.” Make it a limited supply and put some urgency on it
by having the tickets available for a short time. And be sure that whatever you
give away is consistent with your image, so you don’t come o like Chuck E.
Cheese (though I hear he killed ’em in Nogales). In other words, make your
database membership worthwhile from day one, signaling that you’re letting
people into a special club.
By building the database on your own, you will own it. That’s really
important. The lists of fans who follow you on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
etc., are owned and controlled by Silicon Valley folks—not you. This means
they control if and how you can reach your fans, as well as who they are. When
you create your own base, you have full access, forever.
Once you have a list, no matter how small, stay in touch with your fans on a
regular basis. Direct them to your music on YouTube, TikTok, Facebook,
Twitter, SoundCloud, Medium, Bandcamp, Instagram, etc. And when you
contact your fans, have something interesting to say. The more personal you
make it, the better. Which of these would hit you harder?
1. “We’re playing in Schenectady tonight” or
2. “Hey, Clarence, we’re in town tonight. We’d love to see you there.”
(Assuming your name is Clarence and you live in Schenectady;
otherwise, it’s not quite as e ective…)
Another way to engage fans is to run a contest. For example, if fans retweet
or share a post about one of your shows, they can enter a drawing for free
tickets. Or if they post a picture of their ticket, they could win a meet and greet.

That makes your promotion easily shareable and viral by nature. (Technically,
there could be some issues with the laws that govern sweepstakes, lotteries, and
things like that, but artists do quite a lot of this, and I’m not aware of anyone
getting hassled for small-scale stu . NOTE: The key word in the prior sentence
is “aware.” Sweepstake laws are way outside my wheelhouse, so don’t take my
word on it. You should talk to a lawyer if you’re going to do this.)
When you send out blasts to your database, don’t be afraid to tell your fans
what you want them to do. For example, tell them to come to your show with a
friend. Ask fans to tweet at clubs, saying they want to see you perform there.
Ask them to tag you and use a hashtag. This will help you see their responses
and you can then repost them, to reward the fans for their engagement.
Encourage them to listen to you on Spotify, YouTube, TikTok, Facebook,
Twitter, SoundCloud, Bandcamp, Instagram, etc., and to tell you how they feel
about the music. Ask them to tell their friends about your music and to share it
with someone they think would like it. The deeper relationships you can build
with your fans, the better you’ll do.
Once you’re rolling, you can get free, basic data about your music from
Facebook Insights, Google Analytics, and Spotify Artist Insights. For example,
you’ll be able to see where your fans are clustered geographically, and
sometimes also see if your fanbase skews more male or female, and their age
range. You can tell where your fans hang out on social media (for example,
older fans are more likely on Facebook), and tailor your messaging to the
various groups. You can nd out who reacts to your giveaways and promotions,
then ne-tune the strategy. And this data can put your live-gig booking on
steroids. You can strategically target the markets where your fans live, rather
than just booking shows in East Bumbleton and hoping the farmers show up.
Another way to build visibility is by getting your songs placed in TV shows
or commercials. Companies like Music Dealers (www.musicdealers.com),
Jingle Punks (www.jinglepunks.com), Secret Road (www.secretroad.com),
Zync (www.zyncmusic.com), and Chordal (www.chordal.com) can help with
that. They tend to be invite only, but you can apply online to include your
music in these communities and get your songs in front of music supervisors
(the people who pick music for lms, TV shows, and commercials).

There are also platforms like Lickd (www.lickd.co) who stock all the major
labels’ music and o er licenses for people creating social media who want good
music on the cheap. Not much money here, but you’re looking for fans and
exposure, not short-term bucks. Maybe you even o er your music for free in
return for some placements on their home page. The goal is to get your music
placed in creators’ videos so you can reach ears you might otherwise never get.
The overarching idea is to BUILD. For example, if you might only have a
hundred fans on your page, but if each of those fans has a thousand followers,
and if you can get ten of your fans to share your material, that’s ten thousand
pairs of eyeballs staring at your stu (assuming everyone has two eyes…). Maybe
they don’t turn into fans or followers right away, but it gets you on their radar,
and if they see you several times, they might start coming around and grow
your database.
There are obviously tons of additional ways to market yourself, so let your
imagination take ight and go for it. A number of websites o er help with
marketing, both in terms of speci c tools and general advice, but because I
don’t use them myself, I can’t really recommend any particular one. Some of
my friends have suggested CASH Music, BandPage, Bandcamp, Hypebot, and
Midem’s blog.
Of course, with all these techniques, be sure to stay on the right side of the
line between keeping people intrigued and becoming the egomaniac at the
party who gets in your face with bad breath.
Now another big-picture issue. Make sure you stay focused on creating your
music as the rst priority, with marketing as the second. Some people
recommend that you spend no more than an hour a day on social
networking/promotion, so that you don’t use up all that creativity and have
none of it left for your music. Others prefer doing streaks of posting, and then
holing up in the studio when they need to create. Or mix and match.
The above is only a very broad picture of how to build a fanbase and spread
your music. A good chunk of this material comes from my friend Amy
Thomson, prior manager of Swedish House Ma a and DJ Snake. She has

written an excellent book on how to build your career, called Artist
Management and Marketing, a Beginner’s Guide, which goes into far more
detail than I can cover here. Wonderfully, she’s made it available online for free
at myobschool.com, or it may be available elsewhere if you Google the book
name. Thanks, Amy!
As a footnote to all this, you should know there’s an issue in the music
business today that no one completely understands or knows how to solve. As
reported in a 2022 Billboard article, from 2001 to 2004 over thirty new artists
made it into the top 10 each year. But by 2019, there were only fteen of them,
and in 2021 it was only thirteen, the lowest in the 2000s.
There are several theories why this is happening, but since no one really
knows, feel free to throw in your opinion. For example, it could be that the
sheer number of tracks coming out (remember around one hundred thousand
new tracks are uploaded every day) makes it much more di cult to get through
the noise. Another theory is that fans have short attention spans (which is
arguably true for most everyone these days), so even when there’s a massive
breakout, the fans are more interested in the songs than the people who sing
them. In other words (for the most part, not every case), they don’t really care
who the artist is—they just love the song until the next shiny object comes
along, at which point they leave you lying in the dust. So even if you become an
Internet sensation and truly explode, it doesn’t make your career. You need to
keep doing the work to maintain and grow your fans.
Regardless of this trend, some artists are going to break through and have
real careers. Do the work to make sure you’re one of them!
Okay, so you’ve got a buzz going. Next question is whether you want to sign
to a record company or do it yourself. We’ll discuss later, on page 75, whether
you actually want to sign or not, but for now, let’s assume you do. How do you
go about that?
In this day and age, before a label will sign you, they expect you to have a
decent-size fan base and hopefully one or two other goodies in your story, like
high streaming numbers on TikTok, SoundCloud, Spotify, Apple Music, or
YouTube, with a low skip rate (meaning people don’t move to the next song a

few seconds after yours starts). They also want to see that your fans are engaged
and following you on your social media, beyond just listening to your music.
In other words, they want to see that fans are into you as an artist, not just the
song.
All the record labels have research departments, full of data geeks, watching
for anything that gets traction and smells like it’s going to explode. And without
an Internet buzz, honestly, it’s pretty hard to get their attention. So that’s where
your energy needs to go.
On rare occasions, artists get signed because they are ear picks. While that
sounds like an instrument for removing wax, it means there’s minimal or no
buzz, but someone at a label hears your music (hence the “ear” part) and falls in
love. However, none of the labels take unsolicited material, because they’re
afraid of lawsuits if one of their artists later releases a song that sounds like yours.
If they had your recording before the other song was created, you’d argue that
the label gave it to their artist, and whether or not that’s true, the label gets sued.
But they will take things submitted by a manager or a lawyer in the business, if
you want to go that route. However, it’s a really long shot to get signed without
a buzz.
Now for the good news from all this. Labels have basically decided they’ll
come to the party later than ever before, meaning they want to sign artists who
already have a base that’s growing. In other words, instead of nding an
unknown artist in a club and grooming them for stardom, they chase artists
with heat around them, who have a better chance of success and therefore hedge
the label’s risk. However, all the labels all have the same Internet data, so
multiple labels are usually chasing the same artist. And when you have a lot of
hounds after the same fox, the artists have more bargaining power. That
translates into bigger advances, better royalties and even pro t shares, plus the
potential of artists owning the recordings either from the outset or down the
road. So nowadays new artists are getting deals far beyond anything that folks
just starting their careers could ever get in the past.
Interestingly, as I write this, the labels are starting to rethink this “coming
late” strategy. So there may be a move back toward ear picks. It’s far cheaper to
sign artists without a major buzz, and this was, of course, the historical record

company model since there was no Internet data in the early days. Signing
unknowns in general takes much longer before there’s a payo , and it’s true
that most of the artists don’t make it (so the companies have to write o the
investment), but the ones that break through pay o massively.
Don’t get me wrong; I don’t think labels will stop chasing artists who have a
buzz. But I believe we’ll see more ear picks and artist development in the next
few years. So watch this space.
In any event, once they’re after you, you need someone in the business to
guide you through the mine elds. Which leads nicely into a discussion of how
to put together your team.

Who’s on First?
The rst person on your team is almost always a manager or a lawyer. In your
baby stages, the manager is not likely to be someone in the business; it’s more
likely a friend or relative with a lot of enthusiasm. While this can be a major plus
(as we’ll discuss in more detail when we talk about managers on page 33), your
friend or relative is not likely knowledgeable in the business, nor will they have
any high-level relationships. So if you have an inexperienced manager, or if you
have no manager at all, a music industry lawyer can really help.
It’s much easier to get a music lawyer than a manager. Why? Because the
time required of a lawyer is minimal compared to the time a manager has to
devote. The manager is expected to help you with songs, image, bookings,
babysitting (you, not the kiddies), etc., but in the early stages, a lawyer only has
to spend a few hours wrangling the labels and structuring your deal. It’s the
lawyer’s knowledge and relationships—not their time—that count.
You’ll of course need a manager and/or a lawyer even if you don’t go the
record-company route, and the criteria for hiring them (which we’ll discuss in
the next chapters) is exactly the same.
Agents in the music business are primarily in booking live gigs, and for
bigger artists, endorsements and the like. It’s hard to get a major agent at the
early stages when you’re not earning much, but you might get someone local or

a smaller agency (unless you have a manager with clout). Your manager will
guide you to the right person and the right time to bring them on board.
A business manager (the person who collects your money, writes your
checks, oversees investments, etc.) is usually the last on board for the opposite
reason of why the lawyer is one of the rst: It’s expensive (in terms of sta ng
and labor) for a business manager to take you on, and new artists need a lot of
work just to keep nancially a oat. Another reason they come on last is that
very few business managers are willing to take a yer with a totally unproven,
unsigned artist; the business manager’s potential upside is not nearly as great as a
personal manager’s or agent’s, but they have to run up substantial expenses
from the beginning. (As you’ll see in Chapter 4, business managers aren’t paid
as much as agents or personal managers.) But don’t sweat it. Until you have
some decent money coming in, you don’t need a full- edged business manager.
A good accountant can take care of your tax returns and answer basic
questions.

The Search
Where do you nd warm bodies to begin assembling your team? Well, start
with the age-old ploy of asking every human being you know for a
recommendation. Talk to people involved in music, even if it’s only your high
school choir’s piano accompanist. You can lead yourself into any unknown area
by diligently following your nose, and the music business is no exception.
You’ll be amazed how many things fall into your life when you open yourself
up to the possibilities. The only frustrating part is that the people you really
want don’t have time for you in the beginning. (Be assured, as soon as you’re
successful, they’ll fall all over you and say they “knew it all along.”)
The major players are almost all in Los Angeles and New York, with a good
number in Nashville, though of course that leans heavily to country. I don’t
mean to say there aren’t quali ed people in other places—there most certainly
are—but the music industry is centered in these three towns, and the people
who live there usually have more experience. On the other hand, major
managers are increasingly popping up in other places. For example, I’ve dealt

with managers of world-class artists who live in Atlanta, Austin, Miami,
Vancouver, Philadelphia, and Boston. However, the better ones spend a lot of
time on airplanes visiting Los Angeles, New York, and/or Nashville.
Here are some speci c suggestions for building your list:
1. AllAccess
There’s a website called www.AllAccess.com that has a pretty
comprehensive online directory of people in the music biz. I’m told it’s
updated often, and it has the major advantage of being free. You’ll need
to register for the site (don’t be intimidated by the radio station questions
—anybody can register), then click on Industry Directory.
2. Rostr
There’s a site called Rostr (www.rostr.cc) that lists artists’ representatives
in the music biz. It appears to be free if you just want the names, but
costs money if you want their contact information.
3. Hits magazine
Hits is the MAD magazine of the music biz. It’s full of current news and
gossip, reported with a college-humor-magazine style, and is very funny
reading (www.hitsdailydouble.com).
4. Billboard magazine
Billboard is an industry trade magazine, with lots of news, interviews,
charts, and other goodies (www.billboard.biz). Note the .biz ending.
Billboard.com is consumer oriented, while .biz is for the industry.
By no means are these four an exhaustive list of sources; they just happened to
be the ones that rst came to mind. Frankly, I’ve been doing this long enough to
know everybody I need to get to, and I don’t use references on a routine basis.
So don’t take my suggestions as gospel. Check the Internet for more sources.
Here’s some more ideas for developing your list of potential team members:
1. Read interviews with music industry gures and note the names. In
addition to the industry sources above, here’s some major consumer

publications (meaning they’re geared to fans, as opposed to trade
publications that are geared to businesspeople), in alphabetical order:
(a) Music Connection (www.musicconnection.com)
(b) Spin (www.spin.com)
(c) Pitchfork (www.pitchfork.com)
(d) Rolling Stone (www.rollingstone.com)
(e) Vibe (www.vibe.com)
(f) XXL (www.xxlmag.com)
2. Watch for quotes, stories, or blurbs about music industry people online,
on radio, and on TV.
3. Try these online places: TAXI (www.taxi.com), Music Business Registry
(www.musicregistry.com), RecordXpress (www.recordxpress.ca), and
Songwriter 101 (www.songwriter101.com).
4. Some artists list the names of their professionals, together with their jobs,
on their websites, on the info page of Facebook, or in tour programs.
5. Or simply Google artists you respect, together with “manager” or
“agent,” to nd out who’s behind the magic.
Using the above and anything else you can think of, write down the names and
develop a “hit list.” Just keep moving forward—follow any lead that seems
promising.
Once you assemble a bunch of names, prioritize who you want to contact
rst. If you’ve heard any of the names from two or more sources, the odds are
you are on to a person who is “somebody,” and he or she should move up in
priority. Also look for the professionals surrounding people whose music you
admire and whose style is similar to yours. While this is less critical with lawyers
and business managers, it’s important to make sure that agencies, and especially
personal managers, handle your kind of music. For example, the agent who
books Wayne Newton is not likely to book Lil Wayne, and I guarantee you they
have di erent managers. On the other hand, you may be surprised to nd that
acts just as diverse are represented by the same agency (with very di erent
individual agents). And the legal and business management lives of di erent
artists are a lot alike. Rock ’n’ rollers (like Green Day, the Rolling Stones, etc.),

rappers (like Drake, Juice WRLD, Jay-Z, etc.), and divas (like Adele, Beyoncé,
Barbra Streisand, etc.) all have similar needs in music publishing, record
royalties, touring, merchandising, sponsorship, etc.
Once you’ve prioritized your list, start trying to contact the people on it. It’s
always better to come in through a recommendation, friend of the family, etc.,
even if it’s only the person’s dry cleaner. But if you can’t nd any contact, start
cold. You can try calling people on the phone, but expect a lot of unreturned
phone calls, or at best to be shu ed o to an underling. That’s okay—talk to
the underling. If you get someone on the phone, be brief and to the point
because these folks are always in a hurry. It’s a good idea to rehearse your rap
with a friend in advance.
You can try emailing folks, with a story about yourself and a link to your
music. Again, be short and straightforward—good people are always busy, and
you’ll be lucky to get ve seconds of their attention. If you can’t grab ’em fast,
you’re o to the digital trash bin. Repeated emails to the same person help get
their attention, and may even have the subliminal e ect of making your name
sound familiar if anyone ever asks. But it can also be annoying and get your
name into their spam lter, so don’t overdo it.
You could also use that old-fashioned thing you may remember called the
“U.S. Mail.” Since so few people do that anymore, a physical letter might even
get more attention. In this case, you might include a CD or a USB stick (though
people don’t always have CD players and they’re wary of viruses on USB sticks,
so also include a link), pictures, hundred-dollar bills, and anything else to
distinguish yourself. (I once had someone send me a recording stu ed inside a
rubber chicken. For real.) If you’ve gotten any local press, that’s a good thing to
add. Use a yellow highlighter so they don’t have to search the page for where
you are. And just like the emails, be short and sweet, or you’re o to the round
le.
However you approach it, expect a lot of unanswered emails and
unacknowledged letters. Don’t get discouraged.
If you successfully snag someone’s attention and they politely (or not so
politely) blow you o , ask who they would recommend. This is valuable for
two reasons: First, you’ve got a lead from someone who’s actually in the

industry. Second, when you reach out to the recommended person, you can tell
them “So-and-so” told you to contact them. If “So-and-so” is a big enough
name, it should at least get your email or phone call returned. (Maybe.)
Someone, somewhere will nibble, and you can parlay it into real interest by
being persistent. All the superstars I’ve known have heaping helpings of drive
and they’ll continually hound people to further their careers. So hang in there
and keep following up, despite the discouragements thrown in front of you.
Virtually every record company in America passed on Taylor Swift, the Beatles,
and Elton John, so don’t expect people to be any smarter about your music.
And don’t get discouraged—it only takes one enthusiastic person to get the ball
rolling.

Screening the Sharks
So you’ve honed your list, run up hours of chasing people, and hopefully found
two or three nibbles on your line. At this point, you should y, drive, bus, or
hitchhike to meet these people in their natural habitat. You can’t tell everything
from a phone call or a Zoom; you want to see their body language, meet their
associates, see if they work out of a dog kennel, etc. Basically, use your instincts
to feel how they vibe you, and don’t be afraid to trust your gut. If you think
you’re meeting with a piece of slime, you probably are. But if they dazzle you,
be even more cautious—charming crooks are the most dangerous!
The fact that someone works with a lot of big names is helpful, but not a
nal determination. There have been a lot of big names associated with disasters
over the years. Here’s a bit of personal history to illustrate:
When we rst got married, my wife and I decided to buy a vacuum cleaner.
For reasons I still don’t understand, we called a door-to-door salesman. This
buzz-cut, square-jawed man bounced into the house and showed us how the
vacuum’s suction could pick up a seven-pound metal ball. Then Buzz poured
some blue gunk on our carpet and used the vacuum nozzle to slurp it up.
Finally, he started bragging about how he’d sold vacuum cleaners to the wives of
several celebrities and started rattling o a list of big names. At that point, I said,
“Excuse me, but do these people know anything about vacuum cleaners?”

The point, as I’m sure you see, is that a big-name celebrity isn’t necessarily a
good recommendation. It may just mean the celebrity pays no attention to his
or her business, or that the celebrity is an imbecile.
So how do you protect yourself?
Like this:
References. Have the potential team member give you references. And check
them out carefully.
In asking for references, it’s important to get people at your level of success.
The fact that someone takes good care of their biggest client doesn’t mean he or
she will give you the same attention, or even have the time to take care of you.
Odd as it seems, some people don’t even pay much attention to their big-name
clients, usually because they’re too busy. There’s an old joke (based on truth)
about a major artist who couldn’t get his lawyer on the phone to re him. Also,
try to get the reference from someone who’s been using this professional for a
while, so you don’t just get a report on their honeymoon period.
Although it may seem obvious, be sure the professional’s expertise is in
music. There are brilliant real estate accountants who would be lost in the
music business, just as the opposite is true. In fact, even people with extensive
lm, television, or book expertise may not understand music. So be sure you’re
talking to someone who does.
Use Your Other Team Members. You should consult the other members of
your team anytime you hire someone. First, you want their input and
suggestions, and second, these people have to work together, so you want to be
sure you’re not hiring someone who recently drove their SUV over your
manager’s foot. But beware of this: Benjamin Franklin once said (and I’m too
lazy to look up the exact quote, so I’ll paraphrase it) that when you gather a
group of people for their collective wisdom, you also gather their collective
prejudices and hidden agendas. In other words, there will almost always be a
political reason why your other team members want something, and this may or
may not coincide with your best interests. For example, a business manager may
have just referred a very important client to a personal manager. The personal

manager may therefore be pushing you toward this particular business manager
in order to pay back the favor, regardless of whether the business manager is
right for your situation. (I don’t mean to make you paranoid; most people are
ethical and won’t recommend someone unless they genuinely believe he or she
would be the best person for the job, even if it’s a payback. But a great deal of
politicking goes on in the music business, just like any other business, and you
should be aware of it—particularly because we’re a small business and deal with
each other so much.) So, always ask people why they’re making a
recommendation, rather than just the bottom line of who you should use.
Make them give you speci c, factual reasons. Facts are something you can
evaluate yourself, and you should make the nal decision.
Look Beyond the Sales Pitch. Everybody looks great when they’re selling.
When you interview someone, all the seller’s attention is focused on you, and
you are absolutely the most important creature on the planet. That’s almost
never the case when you actually get down to business; the realities of other
people’s needs take their toll. It’s extremely di cult to know this in your rst
meeting, as “giving good interview” can take people very far in their
professions.
So how do you protect yourself from this? Once again, you have to check
their references very carefully. Ask the references about their experience of
working with this person, such as whether they quickly return phone calls and
emails, how fast he or she gets work done, what’s their zodiac sign, etc. It’s a
good idea to write a list of questions in advance, so you don’t forget anything.
Don’t be lulled by promises that sound unbelievably fantastic. If they sound
too good to be true, they probably aren’t. Some people will promise things they
can’t possibly deliver, just to get the job. They gure they have to lie just to ace
out the next guy, who they assume is also lying to you. They also gure you
won’t re them when they don’t come through, because they know most artists
don’t like to make changes in their lives. (These are the same people who will
stop returning calls if your star fades.)
The truth is that there are no real miracle workers. The secret of success in
the music business is no di erent from that in any other business—intelligent

planning and hard work. Promises of “shortcuts” usually don’t come through.
Who Does the Work? Ask exactly who is going to be involved in your day-today work. It may not be the person you’re meeting with. This isn’t necessarily
bad, but you should be aware of it from the start, and you should meet the
people who will be involved. All professionals use sta people, some to a greater
degree than others. In some rms, the sta people divide and move around like
paramecia, so the people you’re meeting today may be gone in six months.
Other places are more stable. So ask, and also ask your references.
Fees. Never hesitate to ask what someone is going to charge you. I know it’s an
uncomfortable subject, but bring it up anyway—you can be in for a seriously
rude surprise if you don’t. And when you do raise the topic, be wary of
someone who gives you a vague answer. (If you really can’t stomach a fee
discussion, have another team member do it for you.)
Personality. It’s a myth to think any one personality style is more e ective
than any other (assuming you don’t hire a wimp). Screamers and table
pounders, if they’re smart and knowledgeable, can get a lot out of a deal, but no
more than those who speak quietly, if they’re smart and knowledgeable. Some
people work with a foil, and some with a saber. Both styles can be e ective.
Remember, you’re hiring people to guide your professional life, not to hang
out on the tour bus. It’s nice if you strike up a friendship with your
professionals, but it’s not essential. (However, with your personal manager, I
think you need at least a solid rapport, if not a true friendship.) I’m not
suggesting you hire someone you really dislike, or someone who has the
personality of a salamander, but I am saying these folks don’t have to be your
pals. In fact, some amount of distance is often helpful. Just as doctors can’t
operate on their own relatives because they’re too emotionally involved, one of
the main things a professional does is bring some objectivity to your life.
There’s a story about Genghis Khan, the great warrior. In the midst of a
pivotal battle for his empire, with thousands of troops on each side, an aide
went into Khan’s tent and was surprised to nd Khan himself sitting there. The

aide said, “How can you be in here? The ght is at a critical point and the troops
need your command.” Khan replied, “I found myself getting angry over a turn
in the battle, and I can’t think straight when I’m angry. I came in here to cool
o before deciding the next move.”
Think about that. If even ol’ Genghis had to detach from his emotions to do
the best job, who are you and I to do any better? When I have legal problems, I
hire a lawyer. This may sound strange to you, but I get emotional about my
own problems, and I don’t trust my judgment when I’m too close to the
situation. So I hire someone who isn’t.
In sum, a bit of distance from your professionals is not a concern, but you
should feel comfortable enough to have an easy communication with your
team. If you think you’ll dread talking to a particular person, look for someone
else.
Decide Now—Conﬁrm Later. Make a decision reasonably quickly, but
con rm it slowly. In other words, once you’ve hired somebody, continue to
watch them carefully (to the extent you can stand to do it). The fact that
someone came in with rave reviews doesn’t mean they’ll be right for you, so
consider them “on probation” until you’ve seen enough to merit your trust.
And don’t just take another team member’s word that it’s working. Force
yourself to follow their moves in the beginning, and you’ll earn the right to
relax later. Remember: No one pays as good attention to your business as you
do.

CHANGING A TEAM MEMBER
Here’s what to do if something goes wrong on your team:
Even if they never pay much attention to business, I’ve never met an artist
who doesn’t have a built-in radar that tells them when something is wrong. So if
you’re feeling weird, then “Houston, we have a problem.”
It may be that things aren’t being handled right. Or maybe you just don’t
feel comfortable talking to one of the team members. Ignoring the issue doesn’t
help any more than turning up the car radio to drown out a rattle in the engine.

It’s like a quote I once heard attributed to Dick Gregory: “I read so much about
the bad e ects of smoking that I got scared and gave up reading.”
So deal with problems head-on.

Talk About Your Problems
I know confrontation is di cult. I have never known an artist (or anyone else,
for that matter, other than a few ornery jerks who’ve been divorced ve times)
who enjoys confrontation. But for your team members to do an e ective job,
you must have an open communication with them. If you can’t bring yourself
to talk directly to the person who is bugging you, talk to another team member
and make sure they carry the message. Fast. Nothing is worse than letting small
things snowball to the point that they build into a major drama. If you discuss
them when they’re small, they can usually stay small. Often they’re just
innocent misunderstandings.
If you talk frankly about your problems, and they still aren’t getting solved,
make a change. No one has the right to expect a lifetime contract with you.
People and circumstances change over the years; those who were spectacular for
you at one point in your life may no longer be interested in you (for example, if
they’ve lost interest in their job, or your career has taken a nosedive, etc.). Or
they may no longer be capable of handling you (for example, they were unable
to grow with you and your career is soaring, or you’ve changed careers and
their expertise is in the wrong area, etc.). I respect and admire loyalty, but blind
loyalty does no one a favor. To me, loyalty means you don’t turn your head and
run o with every pretty face that walks by (and as you get more successful,
pretty faces come out of the woodwork to try to seduce you, literally and
guratively). But loyalty is a two-way street, meaning you’re entitled to the
same commitment from your professionals. You’re only obligated to stick with
someone as long as they’re doing a good job for you. If you’re not getting the
service you want, then loyalty means you discuss it with them and tell them
what needs to be changed. (Again, if you don’t want to do it directly, do it
through another team member.) If things still aren’t being done right, and

you’re sure your complaints were clearly communicated, make a change. But
do it for the right reasons, not the wrong ones.

Lost Conﬁdence
It pains me a bit to give you this next piece of advice, but you should have it.
Once you’ve lost con dence in someone, it’s almost impossible to continue
with them. It’s like falling out of love—it isn’t easy to fall in again. I say this
sadly, because many times we lose con dence in people for the wrong reasons.
It may be that someone with a political ax has buried them unjustly; it may be
that they’re doing a terri c job, but they have the personality of a stop sign and
treat you rudely or bore you to death; it may be they have just delivered bad
news to you ( ring such a person is known as “shooting the messenger,” from
ancient Greek times, when a messenger bringing bad news was killed); it may be
they’ve done a terri c job on everything important in your life, but screwed up
paying your bills one month, so you had no electricity and your spouse refuses
ever to see their face again; or it just may be an uneasy feeling in your stomach
that you don’t trust them. When you nd yourself in this situation, again, I
urge you to talk to the person openly (directly or through another team
member) and tell them how you feel. (I know this is easy for me to say, and I
admit it’s di cult for me to do as well. But I force myself, and most of the time
I nd that the problem is a simple mistake that’s easily xed. And even if it isn’t,
I always feel better just from processing it.) If you talk things out, and the
situation doesn’t get any better, split.

COCKTAIL PARTY TALK
Let me say a word about cocktail party talk. In college, we used to play a kind of
poker called “roll your own.” In this game you get ve cards, then draw
additional cards (like in regular ve-card draw). Finally, you arrange your cards
in any order you want before ipping them over one at a time and betting on
each card. After ipping the rst three cards, everybody at the table looks like
they have a spectacular hand. There appear to be straights, ushes, straight

ushes, three of a kind, high pairs, and every other imaginable con guration to
make you want to drop out and give up the pot. However, when it comes to
ipping over the last couple of cards, most of the hands are mediocre.
I’ve always thought cocktail party talk is the same as ipping only the rst
three cards. Everyone sounds like a genius; everyone has just pulled o the
greatest deal since the Louisiana Purchase. The truth, however, is in the last two
cards, which you never see. The million-dollar deal turns out to be a hundredthousand-dollar deal, with the other nine hundred thousand being there only if
the artist achieves massive success (not that a hundred thousand isn’t a decent
amount of money, but it ain’t a million). Nobody talks about their screwups,
because self-aggrandizement is part of the Hollywood dance of the sand crabs.
The whole point of this is to say that you shouldn’t take casual talk at face
value. Especially if someone has an editorial point of view, like a manager trying
to convince you to leave your current manager for the terri c things he or she
can do for you. (Lawyers, of course, would never do such a thing. And if you
buy that, I have some land in Florida that would be perfect for you.) So make
your own evaluations in the realistic light of day.

3
Personal Managers

ROLE
The personal manager is the single most important person in your professional
life. A good personal manager can expand your career to its maximum
potential, and a bad one can rocket you into oblivion. When the job is done
properly, a personal manager is the general manager and chief operating o cer
of your enterprise. (There are, of course, some artists without managers, but
they are very much the exception, and they usually have one or more other
team members lling this role.)
The most important aspects of the manager’s job are:
1. Helping you with major business decisions, such as deciding whether to
do a record deal, and if so, which record company to sign with; deciding
whether to make a publishing deal (we’ll talk about what those are on
page 224); guring out how much to ask for; etc.
2. Helping you with the creative process, such as deciding which songs to
record, selecting a producer (we’ll talk about who producers are on page
123), hiring band members, selecting photographers, etc.
3. Promoting your career by managing social media, coordinating your
marketing and publicity, and otherwise hyping you to everyone the
manager meets.

4. Assembling your professional team by introducing you to lawyers,
business managers, and agents, and overseeing these people’s work.
5. Coordinating your concert tours by working with your agent to make
the best deals with promoters, routing the tour, working with your
business manager to develop a budget, assembling your road crew,
supervising the tour personnel to make sure everything runs smoothly,
etc.
6. Pounding your record company to maximize the advertising and
marketing campaigns for your records, making sure your records are
treated as priorities, screaming at the record company when they do
wrong, praising them when they do right, etc.
7. Generally being a bu er between you and the outside world, such as
elding inquiries for commercial endorsements and personal
appearances, responding to charitable requests (both for money and for
your smiling face), taking the rap for tough decisions that you make but
don’t want anyone to think you did, etc.
Let’s rst take a look at the structure of your deal with the personal manager,
and then we’ll talk about picking one.

COMMISSION OVERVIEW
Managers typically get from 15% to 20% of earnings from new artists.
Established artists can sometimes knock them lower, as we’ll discuss in a minute.
These percentages are generally applied to your gross earnings, meaning
your earnings before deducting any expenses. That means:
1. If you’re an individual artist, the fee is pretty much what it sounds like
for songwriting, publishing, records, etc. We’ll discuss some of the ner
points later, but basically, if the manager’s deal is 15%, they get 15% of
what you take home. However, when it comes to touring, the 15%
means much more than you might think. You’ll learn, when we discuss
concert appearances (on page 389), that you’re lucky to take home 40%

to 50% of your gross income. That means a manager’s 15% of gross can
take a big bite out of your net. For example, if you earn $100,000 and
net $45,000, your manager gets 15% of gross ($15,000). Since you’re
only taking home $45,000, the manager’s 15% is one third of your
money. Not so good if you’re the artist (though awesome if you’re the
manager).
2. If you’re a group and you have more than ve members, 15% of gross
equals almost the same as, or more than, any one of you earns (assuming
you’re dividing equally). For example, if there are seven of you,
everybody gets one-seventh; that’s 14.28%, which is less than the
manager’s 15%. In fact, since the manager’s percentage comes “o the
top” before you divide up any monies, you only get one-seventh of the
85% left after the manager’s 15%, which is 12.14%. And for touring
monies, a manager’s 15% of gross can be many times your individual
share of net.
Because artists have found it, shall we say, “uncomfortable,” to pay managers
more than the artist makes, the classic “15% to 20% of gross” has softened over
the last few years. Here’s what’s going down:

NEGOTIATING THE MANAGER’S DEAL
Despite the powerful personality of many managers (carefully designed to keep
you in your place), it is possible to negotiate with your manager. However, just
like any other negotiation, the result depends on bargaining power. If you’re a
major artist, bringing in $10 million plus per year, the managers will follow you
like oppy-eared puppies, delighted to take whatever treats you care to drop in
front of them. On the other hand, if you’re a brand-new band negotiating with
a powerful manager, you’re the doggy.
Here are the points to discuss:
Compensation. The rst and most obvious issue is the manager’s percentage.
You should try to limit the percentage to 15%, although some managers argue

that the risk of taking on a new band is worth 20%. They say it will be years—if
ever—before they get paid for a lot of work (which is true). A compromise is to
say the manager gets 20% up to a certain level, and then 15% after that. The
theory is that the manager gets a bigger percentage when you’re young and the
manager can’t make as much, but his or her cut drops to the 15% norm when
you’re successful. This seems a bit weird at rst, because it looks like the
manager has no incentive to make you more successful (the more success, the
lower the manager’s take). But that’s not really true—all managers would rather
have 15% of a big number than 20% of a small one. This kind of deal is much
better for you with success (though of course it’s worse if you ame out).
Sometimes managers share in the net of an artist’s earnings (meaning your
earnings after deducting expenses) rather than the gross. (Net is common in the
UK, but not as much in the U.S.) This is WAY better for the artist—for starters,
the manager won’t get paid if the artist loses money, which is not the case in
gross deals. In one deal I’m aware of, the manager got 20% of the net of a fourpiece band. Another deal paid the manager on the gross for records and
publishing, but on the net for touring.
When a manager has a deal on the net, they will often ask for limits on the
expenses. For example, artists who decide to go on the road and charter jets,
throw parties in every city, put in atable pools in their hotel suites, etc., can
easily eat up the net while having a great time with their pals. Managers don’t
enjoy these parties quite as much. Thus the agreement might be that the
manager is paid on net touring proceeds, but that the expenses of the tour can’t
exceed a negotiated percentage of the gross. Or that the manager has the right to
approve expenses, which I don’t love as much because you could often end up
ghting with your manager about expenses.
A variation on this theme is that the manager gets a percentage of gross for
touring, but the commission is capped at 50% of the artist’s net. In other words,
the manager will never make more than the artist actually puts in his or her
pocket. For example, if your gross is $1,000, and you have $800 in expenses,
your net is $200. If the manager got 15% of the gross, he or she would earn
$150. Under this arrangement, the maximum would be 50% of the net (50% of
$200, or $100), so the manager gets $100 and the artist gets $100. Note,

however, that if you’re a group, you all have to share the artist’s 50% of the net,
which means the manager may make more than any one of you.
In a few situations, where the artist is a superstar, the manager sometimes
gets 10% or less, and occasionally just a salary (no percentage). These salaries can
run well into six, or sometimes even seven, gures.
You could also try to reduce the manager’s commission for endorsement
earnings (meaning money you get to hype a product), and for lm and TV
appearances. The argument is that you have to pay an agent to bring you these
opportunities (more about agents in Chapter 6), meaning you’re paying two
people for the same gig. If the manager won’t reduce their commission, you can
sometimes get them to agree they’ll only commission the amount left after you
pay your agent for those deals. For example, if an agent brings you an
endorsement deal for $100,000, and the agent charges 10%, the manager would
get 15% of $90,000 ($100,000 less the agent’s $10,000). If the manager agrees
to this, they’ll want to cap how much you can deduct for the agent (usually
10%).
Exclusions. It’s sometimes possible to reduce (or even exclude) certain types of
earnings. For example, if you’re a major songwriter who’s hiring a manager to
help you become a recording artist, the manager might get 15% of your
earnings as an artist, but only 10% (or even 7.5%, 5%, or 0%) of your
songwriting monies. Or maybe the manager gets 15% of your songwriting
monies from records on which you appear as an artist, and a reduced (or no)
percentage on other songwriter earnings. Another example is an established
motion picture actor who hires a manager to help with his or her music career.
In these cases, you normally exclude (or reduce the percentage for) the area
where you’re already established.
If you exclude any of your earnings from commission, the manager won’t
be obligated to do any work in the excluded area (though they often do as a
practical matter).
Money-Losing Tours. You can sometimes get managers to agree that, if a
tour loses money, they’ll take no commission on it. This is the same concept we

discussed above, when we talked about capping your manager’s commissions at
50% of your touring pro ts. If you can’t get your manager down to zero on
money-losing tours, then try for a reduced commission (meaning, for example,
instead of 15%, they’d only get 7.5% on a losing tour), and at the very least, get
them to defer their commission until you’re more successful (meaning you
agree they’re entitled to a commission, but they have to wait and get paid later,
when you have money coming in). Another variation is that the manager
doesn’t get paid for dates where you make a small amount, such as $2,500 per
night (or a similar negotiated gure).
Repayable Monies. Sometimes you have to pay back money you got under a
deal (for example, you may have to return money under some merchandising
deals, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 24). In this case, ask the manager to repay their
commission on monies you have to shell out.
Deductions. Certain monies are customarily deducted before computing the
manager’s percentage, even when a manager is paid on gross. Most managers
don’t take commissions on these, even if their contract says they can, but some
try. So it’s always a good idea to spell things out and avoid any
misunderstandings.
Here’s the list of nos:
1. Recording costs.
If the record company pays you money, and you spend it on recording
costs, you shouldn’t pay a commission on those monies. This is because
the funds only pass through your hands (i.e., you don’t keep them), and
so they aren’t really “earnings.”
2. Monies paid to a producer of your records.
Producers are the people hired to put together your recording, as we’ll
discuss in detail on page 123, and you pay them advances and royalties.
Just like recording costs, monies you have to fork over to a producer
aren’t really earnings, for the same reason we just discussed in
connection with recording costs.

3. Co-writers.
When you write songs with somebody else, the manager shouldn’t get
paid on the other person’s share of the song’s earnings, even if you
collect them rst.
4. Tour support.
This is money paid by a record company to o set your losses from
touring (see page 187). Whether managers should commission tour
support is a bit controversial. Some managers argue this is money you
get from the record company, just like any other money, and they helped
you get it, so they should commission it. Most of the time, however,
they’ll agree it isn’t commissionable, because it only compensates you for
a loss.
5. Costs of collection.
If you have to sue someone to get paid, the cost of suing them to collect
the money (called collection costs) should be deducted before applying
the manager’s percentage. For example, if a concert promoter sti s you
for $50,000, and it costs you $10,000 in legal fees and court costs to
collect, the manager should only commission $40,000 (the $50,000
recovery less the $10,000 collection costs). Another way to look at this is
to say the manager bears his or her proportionate share of the collection
costs.
6. Sound and lights.
It’s common in personal appearance contracts for the artist to supply his
or her own sound system and stage lighting. The promoter then “rents”
the sound and lights from the artist for a speci ed dollar amount.
Customarily, this rent money is considered an expense reimbursement
(as opposed to a fee paid to the artist), so the manager isn’t paid on the
amount allocated to sound and lights. But you gotta ask for this one.
7. Opening acts.
When you get to the superstar category, your deal for a personal
appearance may also include monies you pay to an opening act. Again,
since this money just passes through your hands, it shouldn’t be
commissionable.

8. Related entities.
More and more often, managers now own record labels, and sometimes
publishing companies, lm production companies, concert promotion
businesses, or even festivals. If you make a deal with a company owned
by the manager, you de nitely need independent legal advice because
the manager won’t exactly give you advice on how to squeeze them for
the best deal. Also, you shouldn’t pay a management commission on the
earnings from that company. Managers don’t always agree to this,
arguing that they’re wearing two hats (for example, manager and record
label) and therefore they should be paid for both. They also say, if you
had another record company, you’d be paying them on the record
company earnings. In response, you argue that they can’t be expected to
beat up their own company the way they would beat up a major label.
You also argue that they’re getting paid much more through that entity
than they would as a manager, so they shouldn’t “double dip” and get
paid twice on the same earnings: they’d get paid once as a label when you
sell records, then again as a manager when you get paid for those sales.
Also, if you leave them as a manager, they’ll still get paid as your record
company if that deal continues.

Term
The term of a management agreement (meaning the period of time that the
manager will work for you) is usually three years, though some managers try to
get more. If you’re an artist, you want to make it as short as possible; if you’re a
manager, you want it as long as possible. Historically, most managers tied the
term of their deals to album cycles (meaning the time from when you start
recording an album through the end of touring and promotion of that album),
and a few managers (rare these days) still operate on this basis. However, the
concept of an “album” is challenged in the streaming world, because artists
release more and more of their recordings in non-album bunches (both bigger
and smaller than albums), and the recordings aren’t always at the same time. So
as the de nition of an “album cycle” became problematic, the most common

deals these days set the term of a management agreement as a speci c number of
years.
Be very careful when negotiating the term of a management deal. Many
artists have lived to regret being tangled up in long-term contracts with lousy
managers. Yet there’s a balancing act that has to work for both sides. Managers
don’t want to put their sweat into launching your career, only to see you waltz
o at the rst sign of success, and you don’t want to be married to a moron
who’s holding you back.
The most common compromise is to say that if the artist doesn’t earn a
minimum amount, he or she can terminate the agreement early. For example,
the deal might be for three years, but if the artist doesn’t earn $X over the rst
two years, he or she can terminate the deal.
I can’t really give you a speci c dollar gure for the earnings, because (1) it’ll
probably be out of date by the time you read this, and (2) it also depends on
who you are. If you’re a heavy touring band, the numbers are much higher
than if you sing folk songs in co eehouses. Your lawyer and (if you have one)
business manager can help you gure this out.
Whatever gure you agree on, if the manager has any sophistication, they’ll
want to say that the “earnings” have to include o ers you turn down. The
theory is that you can’t refuse to work and then get out of the deal because you
didn’t earn enough. I usually agree to this, but require that the o ers must be
similar to those you’ve previously accepted. So an o er to appear nude at the
Moscow Circus wouldn’t count (unless that’s your act).
Another approach is to say you must have a record deal (or a publishing deal
if you’re a songwriter) within a year or eighteen months after the start of the
term, and if not, you can terminate the deal. If you get this kind of provision,
you should also provide that, if the record or publishing deal ends, the manager
has to get another one within that same time period (twelve to eighteen
months). If you don’t have this second provision, you could get a deal in the
beginning, never make a record, get dropped by the label, and be stuck with the
manager for the balance of their term.
Termination for failing to clear the hurdle can be done two ways. One is a
letter from the artist to the manager containing legal words that translate as

“You’re red.” The other is a shorter management deal that gets renewed if the
artist achieves certain earnings (for example, the term of the agreement is two
years, but if the artist earns at least $200,000, the manager continues for an
additional year). The only di erence between these two arrangements is
whether the artist has to remember to send the manager a notice.

Earnings After the Term: “The Gift That Keeps On
Taking”
One of the most important points you have to negotiate is what your manager
gets paid after the end of the management deal. Even though the term may be
over in a few years, virtually every management contract says the manager gets
paid on earnings after the term if those earnings are generated under “contracts
entered into or substantially negotiated during the term.” This language means
two things:
1. As to records made during the term of the management deal, the
manager gets a commission from income earned by those records after
the end of the management deal; and
2. The manager is paid on records made after the term of your
management deal, if the records are recorded under a contract signed
during the term.
All of this could mean—and I’ve seen it happen—that a manager is still getting
paid seven, ten, or more years after he or she nished rendering services. For
example, suppose six months before the end of the management deal you sign a
ve-album deal. Under this clause, the manager gets paid forever on sales of
these ve albums, most of which will be recorded after you’ve parted company.
I think this clause is way overreaching, and these days most every manager
will agree to cut it back. Let’s take a closer look:
The major things to worry about are records and publishing. Unless you’re
in a television series, long-term product endorsement deal, or some other
nonmusical commitment that could run for several years, records and

publishing are the only areas where you’re likely to have signi cant earnings
from activities after the term under agreements made during the term. The
other contracts you make during the term, such as personal appearance
engagements, may be completed after the term, but this happens in a relatively
short period (although it can represent millions of dollars). And if a manager is
involved in setting up a tour, it’s not unreasonable for him or her to be paid
something for the tour (at least for dates happening within six to twelve months
after the term). So if you’re going to dump your manager, do it before the tour
gets set up.
Sunset Clauses. The period in which the manager is paid after the term is
known as a post-term commission period. You want this period to be as short
as possible, and you want to limit what the manager is paid on. Here are some
of my ways to do this, which are known as sunset clauses because they end the
day for commissions.
1. Records.
(a) The manager gets paid only on records recorded and released during
the term (and not on any others). This is the best for you.
(b) If (a) doesn’t work, a compromise is to pay the manager for records
that are recorded during the term and released within three to six
months after the term ends. If they’re released later than that, the
manager doesn’t get any commission on their earnings.
(c) Another solution is that the manager gets a half commission (e.g., if
the manager has 15%, it’s reduced to 7.5%) on records recorded
during the term but released afterward. The theory is that the
manager only does half the work—overseeing the recording, but not
overseeing the release and promotion. (As in (a), records made after
the term aren’t commissionable at all.)
2. Publishing.
(a) The manager is paid only on songs written and exploited during the
term. This is the best for you.

(b) The manager gets a half commission on songs written during the
term and exploited after. Sometimes you can say “recorded” (not
just “written”) during the term and exploited after, which is better
for you. Ideally you want to say it has to be exploited within three to
six months after the term.
(c) The manager gets a half commission on songs written during the
term but recorded after.
3. Final cuto .
I try to have some date after which all commissions end, no matter what.
Try three to ve years after the term; settle for no more than seven.
4. Post-term reductions.
You can often reduce the commissions while you’re waiting for them to
die. For example, there might be a full commission for the rst two years
after the term, a half commission for the next three years, then over and
out.
Feel free to creatively mix and match the above three approaches. For
example, the manager could get a full commission on records recorded and
released during the term, but only for a period of three years after the term. Or
they might get a commission for a period after the term equal to the term itself
(for example, if the term were three years, the period afterward would be three
years; if it were four years, the period would be four years, etc.), and thereafter
nothing else. If it’s a period equal to the term, you should ask for a “cap”
(meaning a maximum number of years, no matter how long the term is) of say,
ve years. If the manager agrees, they’ll also want a “ oor,” meaning a
minimum number of years, such as two. The limits are only your imagination
and the manager’s patience.
A particularly thorny problem (and another reason you should pay so much
attention to the commissions after the term) is the fact that, after the term,
you’ll need to hire a new manager. As you can imagine, there aren’t too many
managers who want to work for free, and there are even fewer artists who want
to pay 15% of their gross to two managers (30%!). Thus, it’s very important to
limit or eliminate commissions after the term. In truth, most new managers will

take a reduced (or even no) commission on earnings that another manager is
commissioning. But they’re only going to do this for, say, the rst album or the
rst tour, and they’ll only do it if you’re pretty successful. If they can’t start
making money relatively soon, managing you isn’t going to be worth their
time. So while you can live with paying a prior manager something on afterterm projects, you should limit it as much as possible.

Key Man
Another important aspect of your management deal is called a key man clause
(gradually, though not fast enough, morphing into being called a “key person”
clause). Although you have a relationship with a particular personal manager,
your contract might be with their corporation or a partnership. Thus it’s
possible that “your person” could leave the company, and since your deal isn’t
with that manager personally, you can’t just get up and go with them.
Accordingly, you could nd yourself managed by a stranger. Or someone you
know but who smells like the Cuyahoga River.
To prevent this, you should insert a clause that says the person with whom
you have a relationship (the key person) must personally act as your manager,
and if not, you can terminate the deal. If the company buys this concept (some
bigger ones won’t), it will only be for one of the owners of the company or a
very senior manager, not the day-to-day people who stream in and out of the
company’s revolving door.
If you do get this kind of clause, you can easily say that you can terminate if
the key person dies or is disabled, and you can sometimes get the same right if he
or she is no longer employed by the management company. Much trickier is the
situation where they’re alive and kicking, still employed by your manager, but
taken o your account. It’s much harder to say the key person must be “actively
involved” in managing your life, because the manager worries that, even if the
key person is working on your career, you’ll try to use this clause to get out of
your deal—you’d argue that the manager is doing a mediocre job (and thus is
not “actively involved”), and therefore the management company is in breach

of your contract. (For exactly this reason, from your point of view, the broader
you can make the language, the better.)

Double Commissions
If, for tax planning or otherwise, you set up a corporation or other entity to
conduct your entertainment activities, you want to be sure this doesn’t trigger a
double commission. (See page 195 for a discussion of using a company in
record deals, and page 373 for companies used by groups.) Observe:
Management contracts say that the manager’s commission is based on your
earnings at the company level. This is perfectly reasonable—otherwise you
could easily pay the gross monies into your company, pay yourself only a small
salary, and claim the manager only gets his or her commission on the small
amount that comes out to you. For example, if your company gets $100,000 for
your appearance at a show but only pays you $10,000, it wouldn’t be fair to pay
the manager only 15% of the $10,000. However, it’s not reasonable for the
manager to take a second bite at the money. Once he or she has commissioned it
at the company level, there should be no further commission when it comes out
to you in the form of salary. (In the previous example, this means the manager
can’t commission both the $100,000 and the $10,000.) Most management
contracts would technically allow the manager to do this “double dip” (after all,
the salary is your gross income), but in practice it isn’t done (by reputable
managers). Still, it’s a good idea to speci cally say so.

Power of Attorney
Another provision to watch for is one that says the manager has a power of
attorney (meaning the power to act for you), such as the right to sign your
name to contracts, hire and re your other representatives, approve use of your
name and likeness, cash your checks, etc. I like to wipe out most of this
nonsense. You should hire and re your own representatives, and de nitely cash
your own checks. The only time I let a manager sign for an artist is if (a) the deal
is for personal appearance engagements, of no more than one or two nights,

which will be performed within the next four to six weeks; (b) you’re
unavailable to sign the agreement yourself (which shouldn’t happen much in
the age of electronic signatures, unless you’re on some vow-of-silence retreat in
Tibet); and (c) the manager has your verbal approval of the deal. If it doesn’t
meet these criteria, bless the piece of paper with your autograph.
As you get busier, you may want the manager to handle routine approval of
the use of your name and likeness. If so, make sure it’s only for certain uses
(publicity for your own career is okay, but major things like commercial
endorsements are de nitely not okay), and that they can only authorize use of a
likeness previously approved by you.

The Best Deals
Now that you’ve studied managers’ contracts, you’re ready for a well-kept
secret.
Shhh. Go close the door before I tell you.
Okay, here it is: Many of the top managers have no written contracts with
their artists. It’s all done on a handshake, and the only discussion is the
percentage. Their feeling, and I respect them for it, is that the relationship is
more important than any piece of paper, and if the artist isn’t happy, they’re free
to go at any time. Also implicit in this arrangement is that the artist needs the
manager as much as (or more than) the manager needs the artist.
Please don’t misunderstand this point. Many legitimate and well-respected
managers require written contracts, and there is nothing wrong with this. But
there are also a number who “ y naked” (without a written deal), and ironically
they are often the ones who keep their clients the longest.
Even with these folks, I generally do an email outlining the terms. It spells
out the percentages, states that the term can be ended by either party at any
time, and deals with the post-term earnings (see the above discussion). It never
hurts to make sure there are no misunderstandings.

PICKING THE RIGHT MANAGER

So how do you pick a manager? First, review Chapter 2, which applies to
picking everyone on your team. Then take a look at these speci c tips.
Let’s start with the absolute best, to use as a yardstick in measuring your
candidates: The absolute best is a powerful, well-connected manager, with one
or more major clients, who is wildly enthusiastic about you and willing to
commit the time required for your career. If you’re a superstar, you can easily
nd such a person. If you’re not, this situation hardly ever exists. That’s
because, when a manager is powerful and successful, he or she is usually not
interested in anything other than a major money-earning client. The manager’s
analysis is simple—it takes as much (or more) work to establish a new artist as it
does to service an established artist, and guess which one pays better (and
sooner)? (Every once in a while, a powerful manager gets genuinely revved up
over a new artist. But this is rare, and you have to be extraordinarily lucky even
to get such a person’s attention.)
So let’s look at more down-to-earth alternatives, not in any particular order:
1. A major manager with a young associate who is genuinely enthusiastic
about you
2. A midsize manager who is wildly enthusiastic about you
3. A major, powerful manager who is taking you on as a favor (either
personal or professional) to somebody who is very important to him or
her
4. A young, inexperienced manager who is willing to kill for you
There are of course endless combinations of the above, but those are the major
categories.
Unless you can get the best possible situation described above, you’ll have to
make some kind of compromise. The compromise is between power and clout
on one hand, and time and attention on the other. The reason a manager is
powerful is that he or she has at least one major client who takes up a lot of the
manager’s time. This means you’re going to get less of it, and thus less personal
attention (although these people can often do more in a ve-minute call than a
newcomer can do in a week). At the other extreme, a young, bright manager

with no other clients will lack clout and experience, but will spend all of his or
her waking hours promoting your career. And in between lies a rainbow of
choices.
I personally like young managers a lot. If they’re bright and motivated, I’ve
seen their energy overcome the lack of experience and political clout with
superb results. And to help you understand why, let me give you the Passman
Treatise on Managers’ Careers.
Managers’ careers go something like this:
1. The manager is young and enthusiastic, and attaches himself or herself to
a promising young act.
2. By doing whatever it takes, the manager promotes the artist into major
stardom, at which point (a) every other manager tries to steal the artist,
(b) the manager is o ered twenty-seven other acts to manage, and (c) one
of the larger management companies tries to buy all or a part of their
company.
3. After a few years, the manager is exhausted from having worked so hard
on the rst act (back when he or she had nothing else to do and could
literally live with the artist). So the manager wants to cash in on the fame
and fortune while it lasts, and, accordingly, starts hiring associates and
taking on superstars.
4. This is the point at which many managers begin to lose it because they’re
too successful. Some of them have such huge egos that they won’t take
on associates of their own caliber (for fear the associate might steal the
artists). So they hire less capable people and give the artists lousy service.
Others hire good people, but pay them so poorly that their employees get
frustrated and go out on their own (usually stealing the artists in the
process). As things unravel, the manager begins to lose artists who are no
longer getting the personal attention they once did.
5. After these batterings, the manager decides it was a mistake to have tried
to get so big, breaks up with his or her partners, keeps one or two key
artists, and starts a record label or goes into the movie business.

Of course, a few managers have been able to pull o large, successful
management companies, but they’re the exception. Also, most of these big
companies are really just a collection of managers who essentially share expenses
and some central services (such as marketing, digital, etc.), meaning the
managers are operating on their own for the most part.
At any rate, every major manager was a nobody at one time. While I don’t
suggest that a superstar take on an inexperienced manager, I do think many new
artists are well advised to hire a bright, aggressive young manager. Obviously,
you shouldn’t do this if you have the opportunity to go with an established
manager who is (or has someone in his or her organization who is) genuinely
enthused about you. But if this isn’t an option, the right young manager can be
a real asset.

4
Business Managers

ROLE
The business manager is the person on your team who handles your money. He
or she collects it, keeps track of it, pays your bills, makes sure you le your tax
returns, oversees your investments, etc.
Listen to me!!! Did you know that, in California, a person needs no
credentials whatsoever to be a business manager? Contrary to popular opinion,
you don’t have to be an accountant (much less a certi ed public accountant),
and you don’t even have to be licensed by the state. In other words, you could
be turning your money over to someone who has no more nancial training
than you do. And when you stop to think about it, that’s pretty scary.
I know you wouldn’t have gone into the music business if you wanted to be
a nancial whiz—if you were good with numbers, you’d be in some cubicle
manipulating an electronic spreadsheet instead of winning your way into the
hearts of millions. I also know that numbers may make you nervous and might
even intimidate you. On the other hand, there are parts of all of our lives that
we don’t like, and while we can get other people to deal with them day to day,
we have to be sure we choose good people to do it. For this reason, I urge you to
personally spend some time investigating all of the people on your team, AND
BE ESPECIALLY CAREFUL WHEN IT COMES TO BUSINESS
MANAGERS. They can range anywhere from superb to sleazoid, with all
variations in between. And their bedside manner and o ce space may tell you

very little about what they’re really like—the bad ones can be like a shiny used
car that’s rusting underneath a new paint job.
Financial disasters can come from someone who’s an out-and-out crook, or
they can come from an honest person who is just a boob. My doctor once told
me a story about an orderly he had when he was in the army. One day the
orderly decided to go that extra mile and do something on his own initiative.
So, with the best of intentions, he sterilized all of the thermometers by boiling
them.
SO BE EXTREMELY CAREFUL WHEN YOU PICK A BUSINESS
MANAGER!
Hopefully I’ve now got your attention, so let’s look at how to nd the right
person.
Oh, and did I mention you should be careful?

HOW TO PICK A BUSINESS MANAGER
References
The other professionals on your team can be a great help in choosing a business
manager. But remember, they may have their own agendas. For example, a
personal manager may have referred a lot of important clients to a business
manager and therefore has a lot of control over the business manager. This is a
two-edged sword—it means you may get a lot of attention from the business
manager, but it also means that if you have a ght with your personal manager,
the business manager is not necessarily on your side (if the business manager
loses you, it’s only one account; if they upset the personal manager, it could
mean their whole career). This is particularly true when the business manager
also does the personal manager’s work. With reputable personal managers and
reputable business managers, I have rarely found this to be a practical problem,
but it’s a sign to be extra careful.

Family, Friends, and Hangers-on

Barring very unusual circumstances, inviting family members into your
nancial life is extremely dangerous. Most of them aren’t quali ed to do the
job, and even when they are, it’s di cult for them to be totally objective about
you. It’s the same reason that doctors won’t operate on their immediate family,
because they’re too involved emotionally. And not only that, (a) it’s very
di cult to re your brother, and (b) if something goes wrong, Mom may stop
speaking to you.
Friends are also dangerous, for exactly the same reasons. This is an area that
really needs a professional.

BUSINESS MANAGER CHECKLIST
When interviewing business managers, take another look at Chapter 2 for
general questions, then add these speci cs:
1. What kinds of nancial reports are you going to get, and how often?
(You should get monthly reports.) Ask to see samples of the reports. Are
they clear? Can you understand them?
2. What is the business manager’s investment philosophy? Will they only
keep your money in conservative, short-term paper (meaning bank
deposits or government notes of thirty-day to one-year duration), or in
highly speculative pork belly futures? Don’t settle for the gobbledygook
that says, “We tailor our services to every individual’s needs.” Ask what
they’d do for you. And why.
3. Is he or she a CPA (certi ed public accountant)? Accountants who are
certi ed have passed rigorous exams and at least have that part of the job
down. Whether they have the other skills to be good business managers is
a di erent question, but at least they’re true professionals who have
trained extensively and are required to follow the CPA’s code of ethics.
4. How much do they charge? (We’ll hit this in detail below.)
5. What’s the business manager going to do besides paying your bills and
keeping track of your income?

Will they do your tax returns? (Some charge extra for tax returns or
send them to outsiders who charge.)
Are they going to handle your investments or hire an outsider? In
either case, are they paid for investments?
Do they do projections, budgets, and forecasts of your income and
expenses?
Do they coordinate wills and estate planning? Oversee buying and
selling houses? Monitor your insurance needs? Oversee divorces?
6. Do they have a dedicated tax sta ? As you get more successful, you’re
going to need specialized tax advice. For example, when you tour in the
United States, you may have to le tax returns in every state where you
do a concert. And international tours get even more complicated taxwise.
7. What security systems do they have in place to safeguard your money?
How strictly do they screen their employees? What checks and balances
keep a bookkeeper from turning up on a yacht in Venezuela, lighting
cigars with your money?
8. Does the business manager want a written agreement? Most business
managers require written agreements, although some don’t. It isn’t a bad
idea, because it spells out exactly what’s going on. However, don’t ever
agree to a deal that locks you in to them for any period of time—you
should be free to leave whenever you want. If there’s a written
agreement, be sure you see it in advance and have your lawyer look it
over.
9. Does the business manager represent music clients? This may seem like a
silly question, but some very talented business managers—even those
who do lm and television—have no expertise in the music industry,
and you don’t want one of them. The music industry is very specialized,
and you need someone who understands its intricacies. For example, if
they don’t understand music publishing, they can’t do a good job of
making sure you’re getting paid everything you’re owed by the
publisher. Or if you’re overpaying some expenses on your tour. Good

business managers also know when something should have come in but
didn’t; someone without industry expertise may not.
10. Have they handled people with your particular problems and
challenges? If you’re a new artist, you want to be sure they know how to
watch every penny so you can survive. And you want to be sure they
have time for you. If you’re a superstar, you want to make sure they’ve
handled, for example, mega tours, which require massive nancial
controls (as we’ll discuss in Chapter 23) as well as knowledge of how
much venues should be charging, what you should pay for a truck
rental, how to minimize taxes, etc.
11. Do they have E&O (Errors & Omissions) insurance? E&O insurance
pays you if the business manager mishandles your a airs. If they have
insurance, how much do they carry? Also, ask if their insurance only
covers accounting, or does it also cover investing advice?
12. If you live outside the United States or plan any extensive touring or
other activities outside the U.S., do they have international experience? I
probably don’t have to tell you that meshing the tax laws between several
countries (much less understanding the tax laws in any one of them) is a
major pain, and if you have (or think you’ll have) these kinds of
problems, you need someone who’s been down that road.
13. Do they get referral fees from any place they might put your money
(such as buying insurance, putting your money in a speci c bank,
running your investments through a particular stockbroker, etc.)? A
referral fee is an amount paid to the business manager for sending your
business to a particular place, as compensation for referring you there.
Ideally, they shouldn’t get any such fee because it could a ect the advice
they give you—they might be inclined to put your dough with someone
who gives them a fee, even if it’s not in your best interests. However, if
the existence of the fee and the amount are fully disclosed up front, and
if the business manager is willing to credit it against their fees, and if you
get independent advice about the particular transaction, this could be
okay. Maybe. Put your radar up if you see it; it’s a serious red ag.

14. How do they handle check signing? It’s now possible for artists to see
and approve checks online through a secure system, so ask if the business
manager has that capability.
15. Will the business manager object to your auditing them periodically?
(An audit means you send in an independent person to see if the
business manager has properly handled your money.) A lot of people are
reluctant to audit their business managers. They think it’s awkward
because it looks like they don’t trust them. In fact, the ethical business
managers welcome it—they have nothing to hide, and they understand
it gives you peace of mind to know everything is as it should be. (You can
gure out which ones don’t want you to audit.) Auditing a business
manager is expensive ($30,000 plus), so it’s not worth it unless you earn
substantial monies. However, when you get to the big leagues, an audit
is important to consider. If you raise the issue up front, there won’t be
any hassles later on.
16. Be sure the business manager wants to educate you, rather than just pat
you on the head and say, “Trust me, kid.” Most decisions can be
condensed down to a fairly simple summary, and you should make all
the signi cant decisions yourself. Be wary of someone who just wants to
tell you what to do and seems o ended if you question it.

FEES
How you pay your business manager varies, depending on your circumstance.
The custom is for them to work on either a percentage basis (5%), an hourly
rate, a at fee, or a combination. Some people earn tons of dough and have
uncomplicated lives. If this is you, go for an hourly rate or a set fee. Others earn
much less and always seem to have nancial troubles. If that’s more your style,
go for a percentage. (Ironically, if your nances nose-dive, you may need more
of your business manager’s time than when you’re doing well—he or she has to
keep the wolves away from the door and turn pennies into nickels. This, of
course, comes at a time when you can least a ord to pay.)

With percentage deals, a lot of business managers want a minimum fee,
because they have legitimate costs to set up their systems for you. So, unless
they’re willing to take a yer in the hope that you’ll someday be hugely
successful, they want their downside covered. These minimums are in the range
of $2,000 to $5,000 a month, but can be much more for superstars. Sometimes
the minimum fee is a discounted hourly rate (for example, two-thirds of their
normal rate). Under these arrangements, they get more dough if they do a lot of
work, but you pay less than if they were on an hourly rate. Whatever minimum
you work out, it will be against (meaning a prepayment of) the percentage.
If you do a percentage deal, many business managers will accept a maximum
fee (called a cap). You should always ask for this, particularly when they’re
charging you a minimum. The cap will vary with the amount of money you
earn and the amount of work you require. They’re generally around $150,000
to $300,000 per year (which means, if you’re paying 5%, you’re earning $3
million to $6 million a year), but if you’re a superstar with a complicated life,
the cap can go higher. Minimum fees for people in this range are about $50,000
to $125,000 per year.
When you make a percentage deal, it should only apply to money received
(not earned) while the business manager is involved. Also, ask if it applies to
investment income. With some business managers it does, while with others it
doesn’t. If the business manager is farming out investments to independent
advisors (as most of them do these days), I would try not to pay a percentage of
investment income.
If you don’t do a percentage fee deal, most business managers charge an
hourly rate. In this case, spell out what the rate is, and be sure they tell you the
rate for everyone involved, not just the top people.
Sometimes, if the business manager is young and hungry, or if you have a lot
of clout, he or she may be willing to take a at fee for all services, regardless of
the amount of work. Often it’s a at fee for normal services, plus an additional
amount for touring work (which is reasonable, because touring takes an
enormous amount of time and resources). They’ll also charge additional fees for
auditing, meaning looking at your record company’s or publishing company’s
books and records to make sure you’re being paid right (assuming they do

auditing, which many business managers don’t). We’ll discuss auditing in more
detail on page 173.
Listen again! Let me say this one more time: BE EXTREMELY CAREFUL
in picking your business manager. More careful than you are with anyone else
on your team. This is the person who can make sure you have a cozy old age or
leave you playing supermarket openings in your fties.

YOUR HALF OF THE JOB
Just as important as picking the right business manager is your own attitude. I
remember seeing one of Elvis Presley’s bodyguards at a press conference. A
reporter asked why he didn’t stop Elvis from taking drugs. His answer: “How do
you save a man from himself?”
That answer really hit me. I’ve always felt it was one of the most telling
statements about an entertainer’s life. If you don’t care about your nancial
future, it’s di cult for anybody else to. If someone is constantly telling you not
to do something (like spend money), and you really want to do it, you’ll
probably get rid of them rather than listen. Remember Dick Gregory’s quote
(see page 30). If you’re going to spend everything you make, then start spending
money you don’t have, you’re going to end up broke. It’s that simple. And it
doesn’t matter how much you earn. So don’t do it, unless you subscribe to my
partner Chuck Scott’s philosophy: “The best way to build a small fortune is to
take a large one and dwindle it down.”
Few things last forever, and an assured stream of earnings at your highest
level is not one of them. So even the best business managers can’t help you if
you overspend on jets, yachts, houses, cars, and controlled substances.
I know: You’re reading this and saying it will never apply to you. But only
you can make sure it doesn’t.

5
Attorneys

“We’ve got Tom O’Brien on bass, Nick Weber on drums, and Jonah Petchesky on contracts.”
©Alex Gregory/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com.

Now for a subject close to my own heart. It’s hard for me to be totally objective
about this one, but I’ll try.

PICKING A LAWYER
Role
Attorneys in the music business do much more than just look over contracts
and advise clients about the law. They’re very involved in structuring deals and
shaping artists’ business lives.

Lawyers have evolved into one of the most powerful groups in the music
industry, odd as that may sound to you. The reason is that the power bases in
the music business aren’t concentrated in any one group. (For example, in the
lm business, the major agencies are the most powerful players. In the music
biz, the agents are powerful but limited in their sphere of in uence, as we’ll see
in the next chapter.) Personal managers are very powerful, but the nature of
their job limits the number of clients they can take. Business managers can have
a lot of major clients, but they deal only in limited nancial areas and are
therefore not power bases. Lawyers, on the other hand, are involved in all areas,
and because the time required for each client is less than that of a personal
manager, they can handle more clients. This means the attorneys end up seeing
more deals than anyone else, and therefore have more knowledge of what’s
“going down” around town. Consequently, they can be in uential in
determining which company will get a particular deal, which means the
companies want to keep them happy. They can also in uence which personal
manager and which business manager get a client, which means these guys also
want to keep the lawyers happy. This means lawyers have power (and are
happy).

Style
There are distinctly separate styles of attorneys in the music business. Some are
into “hanging out” and acting as if they’re one of the band members, while
others stick to the business side. There are power broker/agent types, who are
good negotiators but not particularly good lawyers, and excellent lawyers who
lose sight of the big picture. And of course there’s a whole spectrum in between.
Using the techniques in Chapter 2, rst assure yourself you’re talking to a
good, competent lawyer. After that, the match-up of style is mostly a matter of
your personal taste. For example, if you like ash, you may want a ashy lawyer
(although I nd more often that ashy artists like their lawyers to be staid and
solid). If you’re honest and straightforward in your business dealings, be sure to
get an honest and straightforward lawyer (your references will tell you who is
and isn’t). If you aren’t, there are unfortunately lawyers to match you.

Clout
It’s true that a lawyer with clout can get through to people that other lawyers
can’t (or at least they can get through faster). Indeed, one of the major things to
look for in a lawyer is his or her relationships in the industry.
Let me illustrate with a story about remodeling my house: Over the years, I
went through a number of house remodels, always looking for the cheapest
possible price (which meant dealing directly with the workmen). I nally got
sick of that process, so I broke down and hired a contractor. During this job, for
the rst time, I realized the value of a general contractor. In the past, whenever I
called up a tile man, electrician, plumber, etc., these people couldn’t have cared
less about me. They came to my job when it was convenient for them (if ever).
If my sink leaked for a few days, they didn’t care because they had a lot of other
customers. On the other hand, when the contractor called, they jumped. The
reason was pretty simple: If they didn’t satisfy the contractor, they didn’t just
lose one job, they lost their next year’s work.
The same applies to lawyers. Record companies can’t ignore phone calls
from important lawyers, nor can they a ord to treat them shabbily in any
particular transaction. The reason is the same as with the contractor—they’re
going to be dealing with the lawyers over and over, and they don’t want to
make enemies of them. So a lawyer with good relationships will get your deals
done quicker, and if they know what they’re doing, will get you the maximum
that can legitimately be had.
You should also know what clout doesn’t do. There is only so much you can
get from any particular deal, regardless of who is asking. If a record company
doesn’t like your music, they’re not going to sign you because of your lawyer. If
they’re hot for you, you’ll get a deal even if you’re represented by Kim Jong-un.
Put another way, the real “clout” is your musical talent. (Note, I’m not talking
about a lawyer’s experience and knowledge—that is truly valuable, and will
indeed get you the maximum from the negotiation. But you should have a
perspective on the hyped-up importance of “clout.”)

Loose Lips

Be especially wary of a lawyer who tells you about other clients’ business lives.
Some lawyers, for example, will tell you exactly what deal they got for a speci c
client. Apart from the fact that this violates the attorneys’ Canon of Ethics, it
also means they will be telling other people about your deal. It may appear that
these people trade con dential information for secrets they wouldn’t otherwise
have, but in fact the opposite is almost always the case—everyone knows they
have a big mouth, so they’re only told things that people want spread around.

FEES
Most lawyers in the music business don’t charge on just an hourly basis. For the
ones that do, the rates are from $400+ per hour for new lawyers, up to $1,500
or more for biggies. Some of us charge a percentage (usually 5%) while others do
something known as value billing, often with an hourly rate or retainer
against it. A retainer is a set monthly fee (like the business manager’s minimum
fee discussed on page 53), and it’s either credited against the ultimate fee, or it’s
a at fee covering all services. Value billing means that, when the deal is
nished, the lawyer asks for a fee based on the size of the deal and his or her
contribution to it. If the lawyer had very little to do with shaping the deal, but
rather just did the contract, the fee should be close to an hourly rate (though I’ll
get heat for telling you this, because it’s usually more). On the other hand, if the
lawyer came up with a clever concept or strategy that made you substantial
money, or the lawyer made the introduction, or created the deal from scratch,
he or she will ask for a much larger fee. If your lawyer value-bills, you should ask
in advance what the fee is likely to be, so there won’t be any rude surprises.
Sometimes you can pre-negotiate the fee, based on results. (For example, if I get
you X, you’ll pay me Y. If I get you two times X, I get Z.) At a minimum, get a
ballpark range.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A lawyer has a con ict of interest when his or her clients get into a situation
where their interests are adverse (i.e., opposing each other). This is easy to see,

for example, when two clients of the same lawyer want to sue each other.
However, it’s also a con ict when two clients of the same lawyer make a deal
with each other.
Lawyers are ethically required to disclose their con icts of interest to you.
Your choice is either to hire another lawyer or to waive (meaning you “choose
to ignore”) the con ict and continue to use the same lawyer.
Because the entertainment industry is a relatively small business, those of us
who practice in this eld are continually bumping into ourselves when our
clients make deals with each other. Most of the time these situations are harmless
and can be handled simply, in one of several ways:
1. Each of the clients gets another lawyer (rare unless it’s a pretty serious
con ict).
2. One of the clients gets another lawyer (much more common).
3. The clients work out the agreement among themselves (or else the
manager, agent, or business manager negotiates for them), and the
lawyer merely draws up the paperwork, not representing anyone’s
interest.
When interviewing attorneys, you should ask if they have or foresee any
con icts of interest. Most ethical lawyers will bring it up before you do, but you
should ask anyway. For example, your lawyer might also represent your record
company, your merchandiser, your personal manager, producer, publisher, etc.
It’s not uncommon for a personal manager to recommend his or her own
lawyer, business manager, etc., and thus it’s not uncommon for lawyers to
represent both the personal manager and an artist. Most of the time, this isn’t a
problem. However, if you get into a ght with your personal manager, the
lawyer will probably have to resign (or at least resign your side if the manager
was there rst). And you can’t expect him or her to represent you vigorously
against the personal manager in making your management deal.
In short, there are no hard and fast rules about whether you should be okay
with con icts. If the lawyer is straight and ethical, you can usually live with their
representing a few other people in your life. But any time you have a problem

with another of your lawyer’s clients, you must seriously consider getting
separate counsel. And if you just don’t like the idea of your lawyer having these
con icts (which is a perfectly reasonable way to feel), get someone who’s
independent.
Con icts, by the way, are not limited to lawyers. Business managers can have
con icts when they represent both a personal manager and an artist (for
example, when there’s a dispute over commissions). Managers can have
con icts when they act in some other capacity, such as becoming the producer
of the artist’s motion pictures and negotiating a fee for themselves that a ects
what the artist gets paid. Or wanting the artist to sign to the manager’s label or
publisher. Managers can also have con icts when they have two artists vying for
the same gig. Like I say, it’s a small business. But we generally work things out
amicably.
A disturbing thing that’s happened over the years is that some lawyers are
selling con icts of interest as a bene t to their clients. For example, they might
suggest that you’ll get a better deal with a certain record company or publisher
because they also represent them. I’ll give you my subtle opinion of this pitch:
It’s utter nonsense. For one thing, if the lawyer is being paid by a record
company or publisher for work on other clients, it’s human nature to think
twice about how hard they want to beat them up and jeopardize a pro table
relationship—especially for an artist who will pay them much less. Second, it’s
unethical for them to use any information they gain representing a company
when negotiating against that company, and you can bet the company is neither
going to like it nor permit it. So be wary of any pitch along these lines.
As I said earlier, it is certainly possible for you to live with a con ict, if you’re
fully informed and are comfortable that the lawyer will be in your corner. But a
con ict is a reason to be careful, not a plus. Accordingly, you have to leave the
issue to the tummy test. In other words, ask yourself whether your tummy feels
like it’s okay, or whether you’re concerned about it. If you’re concerned, get
another lawyer.

ATTORNEY CHECKLIST

Here are some questions to ask your potential lawyer:
1. Do you have expertise in the music business? What kind of deals have
you done?
2. What do you charge?
3. Do you have a written fee agreement? In California, lawyers can’t
enforce their fee agreements unless they’re in writing, which is obviously
a major incentive to have a written contract. If your lawyer requires one,
ask for a copy, so you can review it.
It’s unethical in California for lawyers to have an agreement that
can’t be terminated at any time. If it’s a percentage arrangement, be
careful about what happens to the percentage after the term. See the
discussion of this under management deals, on page 39.
4. You should ask if they object to your having the fee agreement reviewed
by an independent advisor, preferably a lawyer, but at least a personal
manager or business manager. No legitimate lawyer will object to this,
and in fact they should encourage it. If it’s at all possible, you should
have your lawyer’s fee agreement reviewed independently—especially if
it involves a percentage. If it isn’t possible to do this, make sure the
lawyer explains it to you in detail, and that you understand it.
5. Do you have or foresee any con icts of interest?
6. Ask for references of artists at your level and check them out. Does the
lawyer return phone calls? Do they get deals done in a reasonable period
of time? “Reasonable” in the music business is not going to be anywhere
near the speed you’d like. It’s not uncommon for a record deal to take
two to four months to negotiate, especially if you’re a new artist and
can’t force the company to quickly turn around their contract drafts.
Two to four months is a realistic time frame, but if it goes beyond that,
someone isn’t doing their job. I’ve always been amused by a story I heard
from a new client when I was a young lawyer. He had been represented
by another lawyer and, as he handed me his record deal, he said, “I know
this is a good deal. It took over a year to negotiate.”

6
Agents

ROLE
Agents in the music business are di erent from agents in the lm business.
While agents in the lm business are the major power brokers in the industry,
controlling most aspects of it, agents in the music industry are involved
primarily in booking live personal appearances (concerts). Music agents are
often involved in commercials, endorsements, brand deals, tour sponsorship,
VIP meet and greets while you’re on tour, television specials, music placement
in lm and TV, social media strategy, Web3 and metaverse opportunities
(including virtual concerts), and a number of other areas, but they don’t
participate in (or get paid for) records, songwriting, or merchandising. Thus,
they aren’t involved in every area of the artist’s life in the way that managers and
lawyers are. So even though agents are extremely powerful players, their sphere
of in uence is more limited.

FEES
Because agents aren’t involved in your recording or songwriting (with the
possible exception of lm music, as we’ll discuss on page 64), or your
merchandising, you should never give them a piece of the income from these
areas, and in practice they don’t even ask for it.

Agents typically get 10%. Don’t tell them I told you, but some agents will
discount their percentage to as low as 5% for artists generating major revenues.
(This is only for concerts. They stay at 10% for lms, TV, etc., unless you’re a
major hitter in those areas—and even then, they may not budge.) Sometimes
there’s a sliding scale, so that as your income goes up, the percentage goes down.
The industry goes through cycles as to how easy it is to get this discount, so you
have to check out the situation when it’s relevant to you.

DEAL POINTS
The major things to negotiate in your agent’s deal are the following:

Term
Virtually all music agents now work without papers, meaning you can leave at
any time, and they’re only paid for the deals they did while you were there. As
we said about managers who have no paperwork, the theory is that this should
only continue if it’s working for both sides. This is of course great for you, as
you have total exibility.

Scope
If you’re involved in the lm business (for example, if you’re a musical artist
and also an actress, screenwriter, director, etc.), and if the agency is in both the
lm and the music business, the trend is for agencies to insist on representing
you in all areas. Thus, an agency representing you in the lm business will
require you to sign with them for your musical concerts, and vice versa. This
may or may not be to your advantage, and it sometimes is negotiable if you
have enough bargaining power. Some agencies have a rm policy and won’t let
you in the door without a full package. Others are more exible.

Exclusions

Without paperwork, there’s usually not much discussion of what their
percentage applies to, but if there are speci c things you don’t want to pay the
agent on, you need to raise them. For example:
1. While they don’t expect to be paid on records and songwriting, some
agencies try to commission your soundtrack album royalties if the album
is derived from a lm in which they got you work as an actor or actress. I
try to resist this, and I’ve been pretty successful for established artists.
The agencies’ main argument is that, if you have no career as an actor or
actress, and the agency is instrumental in creating one, they should get
paid on everything you get from being involved in the lm. If you do
agree to this, make sure it only kicks in if you’re getting a major part in
the lm. It isn’t fair for an agent to commission your earnings from
musical performances (for example, your fee for singing the title song,
your soundtrack album royalties, etc.) just because you’re on-screen for
ten seconds to tell the doctor she has a phone call. Your argument is that
you don’t need the agency to get your music into motion pictures
(unless, of course, you do), so they shouldn’t be commissioning an area
in which you already have a career. Their argument is that, if they move
you into a new arena (acting), and the soundtrack album is merely an aid
to doing it, they should get paid on everything. Results vary with
bargaining power.
There are agencies that specialize in getting motion picture musical
work for artists. In that case, of course, the agency will get commissions
on your fee for writing music and/or singing, and your record royalties
as well. They normally don’t commission songwriter performance
royalties, which are monies we’ll discuss on page 234.
2. You may want to exclude endorsements and book publishing (if you’re
so inclined), though the agencies don’t like this, and in fact many of
them are very good in these areas. Even in excluded areas, however, the
agents will want to get paid if they nd you work. I like to say they can’t
look for employment in these areas without your consent. That way they

don’t come running in with a basketful of o ers if you aren’t in the
market, or if you just don’t want them involved.

Territory
If you’re a new or even midlevel artist, and you’re based in the United States,
it’s di cult to give an agency less than worldwide rights. If you’re a non-U.S.
artist, and already have an agent outside the U.S., this isn’t so di cult. Even for
U.S. artists, however, you can sometimes exclude territories outside the United
States if you have enough clout. This is often bene cial, because you can hire
agents in Europe or elsewhere who specialize in those markets. In fact, some
U.S. agencies use a local sub-agent for foreign territories, and you can thus
eliminate the middleman. The major U.S. agencies, however, all have their own
shops “over there.”
At a high enough level, you might even eliminate a foreign agent altogether
and deal directly with the concert promoters through your personal manager
and lawyer (if they have the expertise).
On the other hand, even if the U.S. agency uses a sub-agent, the U.S. folks
don’t just sit there idly while the sub-agent does all the work. The American
agency oversees the foreign agent and makes sure the shows are properly
promoted, that you get paid on time, etc. It’s also easier to deal with someone
locally than to get up at strange hours and call around the world.

PICKING AN AGENT
If you have a personal manager, you’ll have only occasional contact with your
agent. You may meet when you rst set up your tours, and you’ll see them at
your shows, where they’ll tell you it’s the best performance they’ve ever seen.
The rest of the time, he or she talks to your personal manager and, to a lesser
degree, to your lawyer and business manager. Thus, picking an agent should be
primarily handled by your manager (since he or she deals with the agent most of
the time), but you should make the nal decision. As we discussed with lawyers,
you’ll want an agent who is consistent with your values and personality. You of

course want someone creative and aggressive, but do you want a hard-core
earth-scorcher, or someone with lower-key nesse? Both styles are e ective, but
it’s your image in the community, so how do you want the business to see you?
There should be a good ow of communication among the agent, you, and
the team on major issues. The better the agent knows you, the more they can
pitch opportunities that are consistent with your likes, dislikes, personality, and
perversions of choice. If you don’t have a manager, the agent will report directly
to you. In this case, the criteria for picking your agent should be the same as
picking a manager.
As always, make sure you get a good vibe from whoever you’re hiring.

PART II

Record Deals

7
Broad-Strokes Overview of the Record
Business

INDUSTRY STRUCTURE
Before we get into the various moving parts of record deals, and discuss whether
you even want one, let’s rst talk about how records make their way from the
oven to your table (well, tablet…). There are several designer methods to choose
from:

Major Record Companies
There are three major record companies in the world today, and each owns a set
of labels. They are Universal (which owns Interscope, Republic, Capitol, Def
Jam, Motown, and others), Sony (Columbia, RCA, Epic, and others), and
Warner (Atlantic, Warner, Elektra, and others). In addition to these mainstream
labels, all three of the majors own “independent” distribution companies (more
about those later).
In prior editions, I included a snappy little chart that showed the major
divisions of record companies. Maybe I’ll bring it back someday, but currently a
number of record label departments are shifting around like staircases at
Hogwarts. That’s because the transition to streaming has caused traditional jobs
to morph into new ones, as well as melt into each other. Meaning everyone is
still scrambling to gure out what the record company of the future looks like.

In particular, the line between what used to be the sales department (getting
retail stores to buy physical records, plus making sure they were displayed
prominently) and the marketing department (getting consumers to go into
stores and buy the records) has gotten fuzzy in the digital world. For example,
when someone places an ad for your song on the front page of a streaming
service, they’ve used their relationship with the streaming service to get that ad
in a prime location (traditionally a “sales” job), but the ad is directed at
consumers (traditionally a “marketing” job). So is that under the sales
department or the marketing department? Moreover, the departments doing
these jobs aren’t the same at the di erent labels, either in name or function. So I
ditched the record company org chart.
Keeping that in mind, let’s move on to a lesson in record company anatomy.
We’ll start with the departments that haven’t changed in the new world,
meaning jobs that aren’t related to how music is delivered or marketed:
A&R. These are the people with “ears” who nd and nurture new talent, and
who work creatively with the artists (see page 124 for a discussion of A&R
people). Nowadays, they also work with (and in many cases are) the company’s
data geeks who look for music that’s starting to trend online.
Promotion. These folks live solely for the purpose of getting your records
played on the radio. In the digital world, radio is much less important than it
used to be, but it still matters. Radio helps build an artist’s visibility in general,
and the streaming companies are more open to featuring your music if you’re
“happening” on the radio. But there’s also a trend the other way around—radio
stations pick up songs that are happening online.
Finance. They compute and pay your royalties—bless their little hearts—and
keep track of the company’s income and expenses. They also deal with audits,
which we’ll discuss on page 173.
Business Aﬀairs/Legal. These folks, in conjunction with the other company
executives, are responsible for the company’s contracts, not only with artists,
but also with digital service providers, foreign licensees, video producers, people

wanting sample clearances (see page 262 for what samples are), and more.
Historically, business a airs people negotiated the deals and the legal
department drafted and negotiated the contracts. Today, business a airs and
legal are almost always the same people. That practice started because of
industry cutbacks when piracy splattered the business into the sewer system, but
it continues now because it’s more e cient to have the same folks doing both
(and it’s cheaper…).
International. As the name implies, the international department
coordinates the release of your records around the world and oversees
everything happening in foreign territories. With some companies, marketing is
now global, so there’s not a separate international division.
Catalog. There is a separate marketing department for older product (called
catalog product), which means product that is no longer being promoted as a
new release.
Film/TV. This department hounds people to use the company’s recordings in
movies, TV shows, commercials, and video games. (It’s also called a sync
department, which we’ll discuss on page 252.) These folks also nd
opportunities for artists beyond existing recordings, such as creating a song for a
movie or a brand ad campaign.
So much for the survivors. Now let’s take a trip to Fuzzy Valley.
Historically the other record company departments were Sales (selling and
shipping records to stores, making sure your product is displayed prominently),
Marketing (publicity, album cover artwork, promo videos, ad campaigns, etc.,
all aimed at consumers), Production (manufacturing, printing covers, etc.),
and Product Management (making sure the other departments all do their
jobs for your record).
This worked nicely when we were dealing with physical product, but as you
know, physical product is now a minor part of the business. Not that physical is

totally dead; there are still CDs for superstar releases, and they’re meaningful in
some territories like Japan and Germany. But CDs are shriveling. Vinyl, by the
way, is surging—to the point that vinyl plants can’t meet the demand, and in
2022 vinyl outsold CDs for the rst time since 1987. Why? Well, in addition to
the fact vinyl arguably has better sound quality, a lot of buyers think of vinyl in
the same category as T-shirts, posters, etc.—a cool thing to have lying around
and impress your friends. And, in fact, many people don’t ever open the
package when they bring it home. But as strong as vinyl is, it’s only a single-digit
percentage of the business.
Back to the labels.
Here’s what these Sales/Marketing jobs look like today:
As we discussed, “Marketing” departments traditionally reached out to
consumers, and “Sales” people reached out to record stores. Since the “stores” of
today are the digital service providers (called DSPs) such as Spotify, Apple
Music, etc., Sales and Marketing Departments are now divided on the basis of
who they’re going after. Speci cally, Marketing people deal with consumers,
and Sales people deal with the DSPs (like they did with stores). Here’s some
more detail:
The Marketing Departments have di erent names at di erent companies
but are usually called something like Digital Marketing, or just Digital. Their
job is to create a campaign around new releases that will make sure the known
world know about your record, through website design, social media
marketing, etc.
The Sales Departments today, similar to the way Sales Departments shipped
physical records in the past, work in coordination with the Production
Departments to handle all the technical functions around digital les, such as
delivering digital les to hundreds of DSPs around the world and correctly
encoding metadata on the recordings (metadata is the information embedded
in each digital copy that tells the name of the song, the artist, the album, who to
pay, etc.). Most important, however, is that Sales people push the DSPs to
maximize streams of your music. For example, Sales folks try to get you featured
on the DSP’s home page. They also try to get you on playlists, and as I
understand it, playlisting is a pretty complex area. For example, you don’t want

unknown music too early in a playlist (listeners skip it, and DSPs keep track of
which songs are being skipped so they can dump them), but you don’t want
your song too late in the playlist (because people stop listening before they get
to it). Their goal is to drill your music deep enough into a subscriber’s brain so
that it ends up on their personal playlist. That way, they keep listening (and
making you money) long after the record was released. This is known in the
industry as lean back, meaning that someone is listening to their own playlist
(or a DSP-created playlist), as opposed to lean in, where they’re actively
searching for new music.
All these departments track social media engagement and analyze the data
that shows how your music is trending. Are more and more people streaming
it? Is it slipping below that recording of a chicken pecking out “Yankee Doodle”
on a toy piano?
As for other departments:
Product Managers and Publicity Departments now handle the logistics
of things like TV appearances or Facebook and Spotify promotions.
Production now plans releases, meaning they get together nal edits of the
music, credits, delivery to the DSPs, etc.
Some companies also have a Strategic Marketing Department that nds
endorsement and sponsorship opportunities for artists (and takes a percentage
of the deals).
Finally, we come to Distribution. The major record companies’ records are
all distributed by major distributors, which means gigantic distribution
networks that are owned by the major labels’ parent companies. These
distributors coordinate digital distribution and move physical records from
manufacturing plants into the stores.
And in a well-run company, all these departments work closely together to
maximize success.

Independents
Independents are record companies that aren’t owned by a major, and they
come in two main avors:

True Independents. A true independent is not owned by a major label,
either in whole or in part, and is a fully functioning record company on its
own. Examples are XL, Merge, Epitaph, and Victory. True independents
generally distribute their records through independent distributors, which are
set up to deal with the specialized needs of independent companies (though
some larger independents distribute through major label distributors). Here’s a
chart, and note that “Retailer” means streaming services like Spotify and Apple
Music, digital stores like iTunes and Amazon, and the disappearing physical
retail locations (which are called brick-and-mortar locations, like Walmart).

Figure 1. Independent record company distribution.

Strange as it sounds, most of the big independent distributors are owned by
the same companies that own the major labels. Speci cally, the Orchard and
AWAL are owned by Sony; Virgin Music Label and Artist Services is owned by
Universal; and ADA is owned by Warner.
Major-Distributed Independent. This is an independent entity that has
little or no sta , but rather signs artists and makes a deal with a major label to
perform many (sometimes all) of the functions beyond recording the records.
These companies may be truly independent in ownership, or they may be
owned in whole or in part by a major record company, such as Sub Pop, which
is partially owned by Warner.
The role of these companies is to nd talent and then mercilessly beat the
distributing company to make sure their records get promoted. Product
released by these companies may be on the independent’s own label, or it may
be on the distributing company’s label (in which case the public may never
know the independent company exists). We’ll discuss this type of entity in detail
on page 199, in connection with independent production agreements.

Figure 2. Major-distributed independent record company.

A WORD ABOUT RETAILERS
At the time of this writing, brick-and-mortar record retailers are on the
endangered species list, waiting for their appointment with Dr. Kevorkian. The
pure record store is virtually extinct, because there’s not enough CD and vinyl
business left to support it. A few independent stores are hanging on, but even
they have to sell posters and other merchandise to stay a oat. In addition, there
are some oddball places, like Urban Out tters, that sell vinyl and even cassettes
alongside clothes, hats, and walrus oil bug repellent (I actually found that last
one on their website).
Today, most of the CDs and vinyl in the United States are sold by Amazon
and big-box retailers (so named because their stores are in the shape of gigantic
boxes). Speci cally, Walmart and Target handle the biggest chunk of the physical
business (I use “chunk” in the smallest possible sense). As CD sales continue to
shrink, these big boxes keep cutting back the number of CDs they’re willing to
carry in their stores—in fact, as I write this, most of them only carry the topselling titles. In addition, these stores are cutting back the amount of oor space
they’re willing to devote to CDs. That’s because they want to get the most
money from their real estate, and if selling Garden Weasels is more pro table
than selling CDs, the weed whackers win. All this, of course, becomes a vicious
cycle: If the stores carry less product, CD sales drop even more, because there’s
less available to buy. Which means the big boxes cut more oor space.
There’s of course no doubt that streaming will be the dominant medium for
the foreseeable future. At the time of this writing, streaming accounts for about
84% of recorded music revenue in the United States, and it’s growing rapidly
both in (a) overall dollars, because of added users, and (b) as a percentage of

overall sales (because, in addition to streaming dollars getting bigger, physical
sales and downloads are shrinking).
If you want the most current gures, take a look at the RIAA website
(RIAA stands for Recording Industry Association of America, which is an
industry group formed by the record companies): www.riaa.com/u-s-salesdatabase.
You might ask why you need a distributor for streaming. Can’t you just
license your music to Spotify and be done? Well, you’d have to license all the
services, and there are quite a lot of them oating around the world. And even
if you did, it takes a lot of e ort to stay on top of all those licenses—the major
labels have hundreds of employees just to do that. However, you can easily get
your music on all the DSPs through services like TuneCore, DistroKid or CD
Baby (more about them on page 77), and they’ll handle the licensing and
tracking. Which makes an artist wonder if they need a record company at all.
Guess what happens to be our next topic…

DO YOU NEED A RECORD LABEL?
Historically, record companies held the keys to the kingdom. It took a large
organization (and a lot of money) to manufacture and ship records to stores
(you needed to pay for manufacturing plants, warehouses, sales forces, people
to ship the records and keep track of everything, freight charges, nancial
controls, etc.). Also, in order to really sell records, you had to get your music on
the radio, which took a promotion sta , industry relationships, and a lot of
money.
In those days, the record retailers were so big that they wouldn’t bother with
small players. That meant, if you didn’t come through a major record company,
it was hard to get your product on their shelves at all. Also, frankly, the big
record companies paid retailers a lot of money to position their product
prominently in the stores. So even if an artist managed to get their records into
the retail bins, they’d likely get buried in the back. If, somehow, an independent
artist’s records started selling anyway, the retailers would pay the artist late (if at
all), since one little player didn’t matter to them. On top of all this, the artist

would have to put up the money to manufacture the records. And if the stores
didn’t sell them, they’d be returned to the artist, who’d lose the manufacturing
costs, plus the freight costs in both directions.
So, putting this all together, it took a big player to absorb these risks.
Well, Dorothy, we’re not in Kansas anymore:
1. While it’s still di cult to get your physical product into stores (now it’s
because the stores carry so few titles), brick-and-mortar retailers are way
less signi cant, as we just discussed. And, as we also discussed, it’s easy to
get your music distributed digitally.
2. Radio still means something for mainstream artists, but far less so than it
used to. Also, radio has become a very narrow channel—in other words,
it plays only a limited range of music genres, and not a lot of di erent
titles. That’s because radio stations aren’t in the music business; they’re
in the advertising business. So they only want to play music that will
bring in folks their advertisers want. Because of this, alternative ways for
people to discover music have become more important, and streaming
playlists essentially became the new radio. But that’s fading as well. As of
this writing, TikTok is a, if not “the,” major source of music discovery
and can massively drive success. But YouTube Shorts and other
platforms are also in the mix.
3. As we discussed on page 16, a direct relationship with fans is the next
generation of marketing, and young artists are proving savvier in this
area than a lot of established companies.
On top of all that, as you’ll see shortly, when you make a deal with a record
company, you give up a lot of control of your recordings (as well as other
aspects of your life, such as the ability to do music for lms, commercials,
concert videos, etc.), and of course you also give up a chunk of your income
from records. You may also have to give up a piece of your non-record income,
which we’ll discuss in a bit.
So, why would you want a record company?

Well, if you’re a niche artist (for example, a jam band or backpacker), and
you’re happy staying in your niche and selling to a small group of fans, you may
not need or even want a record deal. As we discussed, it’s easy to get your music
to Spotify, Apple Music, Amazon, and Pandora, and you can also make a living
doing gigs and promoting yourself directly to your fans. Because your genre
limits your potential audience, you’ll often make more money doing it yourself
than you would if you signed to a record company. For a record deal to make
sense, the company has to generate more money for you (after they take their
piece) than you would get by going it on your own. With niche artists, that’s
often questionable.
If you’re more mainstream, such as hip-hop, pop, or country, this is a
tougher question. You can set up a killer Web presence, build a fanbase, and
market to them. Since your music has a wide appeal, if you break through,
you’ll make far more money by keeping the record company’s share of the pie,
not to mention keeping all of your non-record income. But here’s the problem:
The same way that it’s easy for you to set all this up, it’s easy for everybody to set
this up. At the time of this writing, there are hundreds of millions of songs on
the streaming services. Also, approximately one hundred thousand new tracks
are uploaded every day. A little more than the record stores used to carry…
So how’s anyone ever going to nd your music?
In the beginning, you have to do it yourself, as we discussed on page 16. As
you get some momentum, and want to move to the next level, there are some
label service companies who can help. Some of these companies were started
by talented people who left record company jobs when the industry melted
down, though there are a lot of others than came along after that, and they’ll do
everything from sales to marketing, promotion, etc., under a deal that lets you
keep complete ownership and control. They’ll also let you do a deal for one
record at a time. We’ll talk about these deals on page 210.

To DIY, or Not to DIY?
If you decide you want to release your own music (known as DIY in the biz, for
Do It Yourself), you can easily get it on all the digital services through sites like

TuneCore, DistroKid, and CD Baby, who charge a at fee per year. TuneCore
provides only digital distribution, but CD Baby will also sell physical product
for a at fee per CD; you set the price to the public and keep the balance.
However, they have a minimum order (last time I checked it was fty CDs), so
you’re taking the risk that the CDs don’t sell, meaning you pay for them
whether they go out the door or not). And unlike TuneCore, CD Baby also
charges a percentage of the money from downloads. The Orchard and AWAL
(standing for “Artists Without a Label”) are both owned by Sony and will also
do both digital and physical, but they are much more selective about what
product they take. They charge a percentage of revenue (we’ll talk about this
range later, on page 210). For the most current pricing and services of all these,
check out their various websites.
Of course, getting it out only means something if people know about your
music, so you’ll need to do your own marketing and promotion, as we
discussed on page 16.
As of this writing, most mainstream artists still want to sign to a record
company. Apart from guaranteeing you money (so you can avoid sleeping on
park benches while creating your music), the rec-ord companies have the
resources to get your music heard above the noise of all the other artists out
there. And “resources” doesn’t just mean money. They have sta s of people
with experience in marketing and promotion, relationships with streaming
services that can bene t your music, and radio relationships that can get you
airplay. Also, the major labels have massive amounts of data, which they use to
develop strategies. This is especially so outside the U.S., where the major labels
have local companies and expertise to help move the needle. So a lot of artists
choose to go the label route. Even when they’re generating a lot of success on
their own, many feel like they need a label’s resources to take things to the next
level and build a long-term career. Of course, when you have major success on
your own, you’ll make a killer record deal. And if several labels are chasing you,
the leverage scale tips harder in your direction. We’ll get into how you can
maximize that in a minute.

Assuming you want a contract with a record company, lemme show you what
those babies look like. If you don’t, we’ll cover independent deals later (on
pages 208 and 210), but you should take a look here to see what you’re missing.

WHAT’S A RECORD?
Let’s start with a real basic: What’s a record?
Interestingly, in virtually every record agreement, the contractual de nition
of “record” includes both audio-only and audiovisual recordings (meaning
recordings with both sound and visual images, such as music videos).
Surprisingly, this language has been in deals since the 1960s, which was before
videocassettes and DVDs, much less streaming, were invented.
Also dating back to those early days, the de nition of records included (and
still does) any other device now or hereafter known that is capable of
transmitting sound alone, or sound with visual images. And even more
important, the current deals de ne “records” to mean any kind of delivery of
your performances, whether sound alone or with visuals. This language is
designed to ensure that the company has rights to mobile, Internet, and
whatever else comes down the pike.
As you’ll see later, these broad de nitions in record deals can make life a bit
tricky if you’re a recording artist and also an actor or actress in lms. Stay tuned
(or peek at page 454 if you can’t wait).
By the way, did you know that, originally, records were made by having the
musicians and singers perform for each record sold? That’s because there was no
mass duplication process in those days, and thus the recordings were made
directly onto the wax that was ultimately sold (meaning every record in a store
contained a unique, one-time performance). Can you imagine how sick you’d
be of a song that sold a million copies?

MASTERS/RECORDINGS
Historically, the record company referred to each recording as a master, and it
had two meanings, noted below. However, while you’ll see “master” in older

contracts, they are now often called recordings because of the negative
implication of the word “master.”
Recording has two meanings:
1. The original recording made in the studio is called a recording.
Historically that meant the original tape from the session, though
nowadays recordings are almost entirely done on computer hard drives.
Recordings are multitrack, meaning that each instrument and voice
part is recorded on a separate track: the drums on one track, guitar on
another, voice on another, etc. When the recording is nished, it is then
edited, mixed, and EQ’d. As in lms, editing means cutting out the
parts you don’t like and splicing in the parts you do. Mixing means
getting the right level for each track, so that the drums are the right
volume during each particular part of the song, the voice is raised a bit
on the chorus, etc. Also as part of mixing, the sounds may be enhanced
through processes I have never completely understood. EQ’ing stands for
equalizing, and means that the bass, midrange, and treble are each
adjusted to the right level (so that no one of them overpowers the
others). The mixed multitrack is then reduced down to a two-track
stereophonic recording, which is ready for distribution.
You may have also heard the term stems. Stems are the individual
track recordings of each instrument and each vocal, usually the version
that was used in making the nal two-track stereo recording. You need
stems for a remix, which means, not surprisingly, a new mix of the
original record (such as a dance mix, club mix, radio mix, etc.). You also
use stems when you perform live to the track, or when you use a
di erent version of the recording, for example without the vocals in an
audiovisual work.
2. The word recording also means a recording of one particular song. Thus,
you might say an album has “ten recordings” (meaning ten selections)
on it. These individual recordings are also called tracks, or sometimes
cuts, because of the historical process of cutting grooves into vinyl for
each song.

So there are two de nitions of recordings—the original multitrack and the
nished two-track.

ROYALTY COMPUTATION
Enough about art; let’s talk about money.
We’ll start with your royalties.

Basic Concept
My brother-in-law, Jules, was in the used car business. He was famous
throughout the West Valley because he’d trade cars for anything. At one point,
he traded a car for a silver tea set, a set of golf clubs, and a mule. (Honest.) He
then traded the mule, along with a stained-glass window of Da y Duck, for an
English bulldog named Rosie.
About that time, my wife and I were looking for a dog. It was before we had
children, and we wanted to test our parenting skills on something that wouldn’t
use drugs if we failed. In trying to decide what kind of dog we wanted, we used
to take Rosie for outings on weekends. In a perverted way, we began to think of
her gnarled face and drooling as cute. Anyway, Jules decided he was going to
breed her, and we wanted a puppy. So I helped him nd a stud dog, through a
sophisticated referral system—the Yellow Pages (for you young ’uns, Yellow
Pages were the Internet in those days). I called a place named Royal Family
Bulldogs, which conjured up images of some country squire’s dogs lounging
around on velvet pillows. It turned out to be a dilapidated house in Pacoima,
the most impressive feature of which was its bulldog smells. But Royal Family
had a brown-and-white champion stud named Winston, so Jules hired
Winston, and Rosie got pregnant.
After a few weeks of this, Jules decided he wasn’t interested in the headaches
of small puppies. So he enlisted the help of his friend Corky. Corky’s deal was
that she would take care of Rosie and the puppies, and when each dog was sold,
she’d get half the sales price. So if a dog sold for two hundred dollars, Jules
would get a hundred dollars, and Corky would get a hundred dollars.

So what does this riveting story have to do with records? Well, your record
royalty is very much like Jules’s share of the bulldog proceeds. In the case of
records, the artist (Jules) turns the recordings (pregnant Rosie) over to the
record company (Corky), who then monetizes the nished product (puppies).
For each record (puppy) sold, the artist gets a piece of the money, and the
company keeps the rest to cover its costs and make a pro t.

Figure 3. Bulldogs and royalties.

Basic Royalty Computations
The division of proceeds between the artist and record company is a bit more
complicated than the puppy deal. In fact, for many years, this process was more
complex than NASA’s formula for getting the space shuttle home. But then, in
a surge of Why can’t we all just get along?, the companies shifted to a much
simpler system. You get o easy—I had to learn all the complicated crap. (I’ve
included a section on how it used to work in Appendix A at the back of the
book, titled “Ye Olde Royalty Calculations.” It’s included because (1) there are a
number of older deals written this way, (2) I spent hours writing that section
and hate to see it go to waste, and (3) even though nobody ever reads anything
titled “Appendix,” I thought you might need it some night if you have trouble
sleeping.)

And now back to our regularly scheduled programming.
To follow this next part, we’ll need to use a little math. Don’t worry if
numbers aren’t your strong suit—I’ll go slowly. I explained these concepts to
my cousin David, who has to take o his shoes and socks to count to twenty,
and he understood them.
Here’s how it works:
1. For streaming, it’s just like the bulldogs. The artist gets a percentage of
what the record company receives for streaming your recordings. This is
really as straightforward as it’s ever been in the business (those early
accounting magicians, who found numerous ways to screw artists while
smiling at them, must be rattling in their graves). In other words, if the
company gets $100 from your recordings, and you have a 10% royalty,
you get $10.
There are, however, a few bumps along the way to guring out how
much money your percentage applies to, and one particularly important
issue around foreign streaming that we’ll discuss in a minute.
The basic streaming economics work like this:
a. Each month, the streaming services count their total streams. Just
to pick an easy example, assume that all the music on Spotify had a
total of one million streams last month (they actually have billions,
I’m just using numbers that make for simple math).
b. Next, they look at how many of those streams were your record
company’s recordings. If your company had 300,000 streams that
month, it would be 30% of the one million total streams.
c. Spotify then looks at their total revenue for the month
(subscription money and advertising revenue). They deduct a
negotiated percentage, which is Spotify’s pro t margin (more about
that later), then pay the rest to the record companies (they also pay
songwriters, but we’ll also save that for later). Let’s say there’s $1
million left after Spotify’s percentage. That goes to the record
companies, divvied up on the basis of how many plays came from
each company’s recordings. In our example, since your record

company had 30% of the total streams, they’d get 30% of the $1
million, or $300,000. (By the way, there’s some controversy
around this calculation, which we’ll discuss on page 145.)
d. The record company then looks at the number of streams for each
of their artists. Using our example of 300,000 streams for your
company, if you had 60,000 of those streams, you’d be 20% of the
record company’s streams for that month.
e. Accordingly, 20% of your record company’s $300,000 revenue
from Spotify would be allocated to your recordings ($60,000).
f. The record company then applies your royalty rate to the $60,000
attributed to your recordings. So if you had a 10% royalty rate,
you’d get 10% of $60,000, or $6,000. (Again, these numbers have
nothing to do with reality; they’re just simple numbers to make the
example easier. Major streaming artists can make multi-millions
from streaming, even after taking out the record company piece.)
2. For downloads and physical product, the artist royalty is a percentage of
the wholesale price. The companies also call this price the published
price to dealers (PPD to its friends), or sometimes (mostly outside the
United States) the base price to dealers (BPD). So if the PPD for an
album download is $7 (which is about right these days), and you have a
10% royalty, you get 70¢ for each album sold. Some labels, however, base
your royalty on the company’s receipts, less taxes.
In either ease, each royalty percentage is known as a point, so if you
have a 10% royalty, you have 10 points.

Physical Peculiarities
When it comes to physical product, there are a few wrinkles in computing
royalties that don’t apply to digital. Physical is of course a small and diminishing
percentage of the biz, but these provisions are still in every record deal, so you
should take a look. Or skim through. Or skip to the next chapter. Or go walk the
dog. Your call.

Free Goods. Physical royalties are paid for each record sold. Why do I
emphasize the word sold? Well, the companies give away some albums to
retailers, which are called free goods, or more speci cally, special campaign
free goods. This practice started when the companies wanted to push out large
numbers of a particular artist’s album. To get stores to stock more of it, they
gave away 10% or more of all records shipped. Originally, these were short-term
deals (a few months), but they’ve evolved into a near-permanent arrangement.
Because record companies don’t get paid for these free goods, they don’t pay
royalties on them. In reality, these goods are just a discount of the price. If you
have some clout, you can limit these free goods to 10% of total albums shipped.
Promotion Copies. Records given away for promotion, such as radio-station
copies, contest giveaways, etc., are also free goods and don’t bear royalties. They
are known as promotional or promo (pronounced “pro-moe”) records. These
don’t go to retailers and the physical ones are marked “not for sale.” They are
also disappearing, as radio now gets everything digitally. Besides, what contest
winner wants a CD?
Return Privilege. To understand this next part, you need to know that
physical records are sold with a 100% return privilege. This means, if a retailer
orders one hundred records from RCA but can’t sell them, it can bundle them
up, ship them back to RCA, and get credit for (or a refund of) the price it paid.
This practice is unusual in most businesses. Normally, if you buy a load of
plastic amingos and can’t sell them, you eat them.
To see why the return privilege is important, let’s go back to Rosie’s puppies.
A customer comes to Corky’s house and wants to buy one of the dogs. But she
isn’t sure the puppy will get along with her children, so she says, “I’ll give you a
check for the puppy, but hold it while I take the dog home to play with the kids.
If, after a week or so, everything is going well, you can cash the check. If not, I’ll
bring the dog back for a refund.” Corky agrees, willing to do anything to move
the squirming little nippers out of her living room.
Later the same day, she tells Jules about the deal. Jules then asks for his half of
the check (which of course Corky can’t yet cash), and Corky suggests he have

intercourse with himself. She says he can have his share when the buyer decides
to keep the dog.
Reserves. The reserves used by record companies work exactly the same way
(usually without the suggestion for self-intercourse). Because physical product is
sold on a 100% return basis, the companies don’t know whether the records will
sell to customers or get returned by the retailer. Because the records may come
back, the companies (like Corky) keep a portion of the royalties that would
otherwise be payable to the artist (Jules) until they know whether the sales to the
retailer are nal. This holdback is called a reserve against returns.
For example, if a company ships 10,000 CDs of an artist, they may only pay
the artist on 6,500 of these and wait to see if the other 3,500 are returned. At
some point in the future (usually within two years after the shipment), the
monies are paid through to the artist. The technical term for this pay-through is
liquidating the reserve. Of course, if the records are returned, the reserves are
never paid to the artist because the sales are canceled, and the royalty is never
earned.

8
Advances and Recoupment

ADVANCES: THE BASIC CONCEPT
Back to Jules and his bulldogs. Our friends at Royal Family charged him a $300
stud fee for the services of Winston. Let’s suppose Jules didn’t have the $300.
Corky (who’s agreed to raise the puppies in exchange for 50% of the sales price)
comes up with an idea: She says she’ll pay Jules the $300, or pay it directly to
Royal Family, and then take her money back from Jules’s share of money from
the puppies. For example, if the puppies sell for $200 each (so that Corky gets
$100 and Jules gets $100 for each dog), Corky would keep Jules’s $100 share of
the rst three puppies ($300) to get back the stud fee.
This is exactly how a record company advance works. The company pays a
sum of money to the artist (the $300 stud fee) and then keeps the artist’s
royalties (the proceeds from selling the puppies) until it gets its money back. So
if a company gives an artist $10,000 to sign a record deal, it keeps the rst
$10,000 of royalties that would otherwise be payable to the artist.
The process of keeping the money to recover an advance is called
recoupment, and we say an advance is recoupable from royalties. The amount
of unrecouped monies is called your unrecouped balance, and also called your
de cit or red position (from the accounting use of red ink to signify a business
loss), meaning this is the amount that has to be recovered before you get paid.
So if you get a $100,000 advance and earn $75,000 in royalties, you have
recouped $75,000 of the advance, and your unrecouped balance (deﬁcit) is

$25,000. Or you could say you are $25,000 in the red, or $25,000 unrecouped.
Once you recoup, you’re said to be in the black.
Here’s another way to look at it:
When I grew up in Texas, it was a big deal to drive just outside the city and
look at the huge water tanks with the names of towns painted on the side. (It
takes very little to make me happy.) In fact, Farmer’s Branch, a city outside
Dallas, had a water tower that was a major local site. (Not as famous as its post
o ce, however, because the sign there said FARMER’S BRANCH BRANCH.
Honest.)
Anyway, picture a water tower with a big ol’ connecting pipe that runs deep
into the ground. The connecting pipe feeds into a dry well that needs a
thousand gallons of water to ll it up to ground level. If there wasn’t any other
access to the water, you’d have to wait until it lled the well up to ground level
(that is, until a thousand gallons had been poured in) before you could get any
water. If there were only ve hundred gallons, you couldn’t reach it (see
Illustration A in Figure 4), but when another ve hundred gallons was added,
you could (see Illustration B).

Figure 4. Deﬁcit and recoupment.

Recoupment works exactly the same way. The water represents your
royalties, and the ditch is your de cit account. If you got a $1,000 advance from

the record company, your account is $1,000 unrecouped. Until you earn
$1,000 of royalties (i.e., until you have enough water to ll the well), you don’t
get anything. In other words, just like the hole needing a thousand gallons of
water before you can get a drink, the record company needs to keep the rst
$1,000 of royalties before you get any money.

OTHER GOODIES
Monies paid directly to you aren’t the only recoupable monies. Recording costs
are also recoupable from your royalties, and so are a portion of costs for video
production, independent publicity, independent promotion (see page 184 for
what that means), advertising campaigns, website creation and hosting, monies
paid to others on your behalf (for example, to buy equipment or to support a
personal appearance tour, wardrobe, vocal coaching, choreography), and
anything else that isn’t nailed down.
Recoupable recording costs include everything you can think of, which is
often a page-long list in your record deal. It’s not just studio time; it includes
equipment rental, travel, arranging, instrument transportation, etc. It also
includes union scale (scale means the minimum amount a union requires
everyone to pay its members) that’s paid to you and others to perform at
recording sessions.
In addition to a speci c list of recoupable stu (like cash to you, recording
costs, and video costs), every contract has a general provision that says all
amounts “paid to you or on your behalf, or otherwise paid in connection with
this agreement” are recoupable unless the contract speci cally provides
otherwise. You can feel the history jumping from the pages on this one—
Charlie Artist asked his company to advance the cost of a trip to see his mom,
and then argued the money was nonrecoupable because the contract didn’t say
it was recoupable. This of course is wrong, but the broad language that the
companies now use is overkill—sort of like using a sledgehammer to squash a y
(which is e ective, but messes up the kitchen). In practice, the companies don’t
abuse this language, but I like to add my own broad language, saying they can’t
recoup amounts that are “customarily nonrecoupable in the industry.”

Risk of Loss
What happens if you don’t sell enough records to get back the full amount of
the advance? With very rare exceptions, such as your failure to deliver product
or otherwise seriously breaching your contract, advances are nonreturnable. In
other words, it’s totally the record company’s risk. So if you don’t sell any
records, it never gets back its advances. (This nonreturnable aspect is also
signi cant because it means advances are taxable income when you get them, as
opposed to when they’re recouped.)

CROSS-COLLATERALIZATION
An important concept tied to recoupment is that of cross-collateralization.
Remember the illustration on page 87, with the two towers side by side, and
two 1,000-gallon wells? The water tank for one of the wells contains exactly
1,000 gallons, which means the well is full and the water usable. The other tank
has only 500 gallons, so you can’t reach the water. Suppose we dug a hole
underground that connected these two wells. In that case, the same 1,500
gallons (500 from Well A and 1,000 from Well B) would be distributed equally
between the wells (750 gallons in each), and you couldn’t reach the water in
either of them (see Figure 5 below).

Figure 5. Cross-collateralization.

Cross-collateralization in record deals works exactly the same way as the
connected wells. And it’s built into every deal.
Let’s assume you get a $100,000 advance for album number 1, plus another
$100,000 for album number 2. Now suppose album number 1 earns royalties
of $10,000, and album number 2 earns royalties of $120,000. If the two
albums were not cross-collateralized (the two wells were not connected), you
would get nothing for album number 1 (it only earned back $10,000 of the
$100,000 advance, so it’s $90,000 unrecouped), but you’d be paid $20,000 for
album number 2 (the $20,000 earned in excess of the $100,000 needed to
recoup the $100,000 advance). However, except for very rare circumstances,
this only happens in Fantasyland. In the real world, the two albums are always
cross-collateralized (i.e., the wells are always connected), which means the entire
$200,000 de cit ($100,000 for each album) gets recouped from the entire
$130,000 earnings ($10,000 from album number 1 plus $120,000 from album
number 2). Accordingly, your account is $70,000 unrecouped ($200,000 less
$130,000), and this de cit carries forward against the next album(s).

Cross-Collateralization of Deals
Cross-collateralization can also apply to di erent agreements. These can be
simultaneous agreements (for example, an artist signing a recording and
publishing agreement with the same company), or they can be sequential (such
as an artist who, at the end of a record agreement, signs a new deal with the
same company). In either case, the concept is that advances under either
agreement can be recouped from royalties under both. This is never good for
the artist. NEVER.
Most companies include language in their form contract that automatically
cross-collateralizes the deal with all other deals. Major record companies don’t
try to cross-collateralize a record deal with a publishing deal, but small labels
may (see page 313). However, everyone tries to cross-collateralize sequentially,
meaning that advances under your current recording deal are crosscollateralized with royalties under past and future record deals. The language
that does this is buried innocently in the recoupment language and can easily be

missed by the untrained eye. It says that advances and costs can be recouped
from royalties payable, and royalties can be used to recoup advances and costs
paid, “under this or any other agreement.” (Your eye is now trained—so don’t
miss it!) I’ve been reasonably successful in knocking this language out of artists’
rst deals by arguing that the issue should be discussed later, if and when there is
a second contract. My argument is that there is no other deal to crosscollateralize with, and until there is, the language is meaningless. That reduces
the point down to who is more likely to forget about it—the artist or the
company—at the time of the new deal. (Shocker: The company won’t forget.)
Now having ridden a high horse while telling you how bad this is, it’s usually
speci cally negotiated when you’re making a new deal and looking for a larger
advance. Allowing the company to use your old royalties to recoup a new
advance will pump up the number because you’re lessening the company’s risk
that they can get back their money. However, the idea is that this should be
done at the time of the new deal, not as part of your current deal. So keep it out
of the contract and consider it when you make a new one.

9
Real-Life Numbers

OVERVIEW
Let’s start to plug some real industry gures into these concepts.

What’s Your Clout?
I chucked the section on determining your clout that was in the prior editions.
That’s because it was based on album sales levels, which are irrelevant in the
streaming age. Today, if you’re a new artist, it’s all about how much online heat
you have; if you’ve done a few albums, then it’s about your streaming and sales
track record.
Weirdly, the industry still translates today’s streaming numbers and singletrack downloads into album sales equivalents, since that’s what they’re used to.
For example, the U.S. industry uses album equivalents to determine whether an
album is gold (500,000 units) or platinum (one million units). It works like
this:
1. 10 single-song downloads equal the sale of one album. This is known in
the biz as a Track Equivalent Album (or TEA—pronounced one
letter at a time, not like a drink in the English countryside).
2. 1,500 streams equal the sale of one album (known as a Streaming
Equivalent Album (or SEA—also pronounced one letter at a time, not
like the… you get the idea).

TEAs and SEAs are referred to collectively as STEAs.
3. And of course a CD or vinyl sale, and a full-album download, each
count as one album sale.
Back to clout.
It’s now based on what the company thinks of your streaming potential in
the future. Online heat is the biggest factor, though some established artists do
well with physical product as well. Also, your genre of music is important. For
example, at the time of this writing, the biggest streaming numbers are in hiphop and pop, while rock bands are having a tough go. In addition, hip-hop
artists tend to put out a lot of product, certainly more than pop, and that of
course drives up your numbers. But when it’s all said and done, just as it’s
always been, the more record companies that are chasing you, the better deal
you’re going to get.
So here’s some categories I’ve made up, just to have a frame of reference.
These aren’t industry terms, just things I pulled out of my esophagus to give
you a general idea of how things break down. Also, these aren’t precise points
on a map; most folks would fall above, below, or in between these categories.
But we gotta start somewhere, so let’s use these:
1. Minor heat. New artist with some social media activity, and one, maybe
two, labels interested.
2. Moderate heat. Good social media presence, good TikTok or
SoundCloud numbers, moderate amount of streaming. Two or more
labels chasing.
3. Heavy heat. Most likely hip-hop or pop, with almost every label
frothing over you. Usually your current product has strong streaming
and social media numbers, massive fan engagement, and your current
product is available for the record label to distribute because you did it
on your own. Add more degrees of heat if you’ve got a track record of
prior releases getting bigger each time.
As of this writing, TikTok numbers are a massive driver of deal
mania. If you’re exploding there, expect to hear from an avalanche of

record companies who’ve been tipped by their data analyst geeks.
4. Superstar. Streams and social media in the stratosphere, with consistent
performance over time or, even better, growing numbers.

ROYALTIES
Range of Royalties
Using the above categories, the following is the current industry range of U.S.
royalties:
1. Minor heat: 15% to 18%
2. Moderate to heavy heat: 18% to 21%
3. Superstar: 22% plus, sometimes higher on streaming, or a share of the
record company’s pro ts.
Historically, new artists never got a pro t share, but it’s now becoming more
common for artists with heat to get 50% of the label’s pro ts. We’ll talk about
how pro ts are computed later (on page 163).
Sometimes, rather than pro ts, you can get a distribution deal, meaning the
label takes a distribution fee and pays you the rest, but that’s usually for much
less of an advance. We’ll get into all that on page 209.
Let’s go deeper into the economics.
1. Streaming. Sorry, what did you say? Oh, yeah, I wondered how long it
would take you to ask… What’s each stream worth? The answer is, “It
depends.” It depends on:
(a) Is it streamed on a service that is subscription only (Apple Music, for
example)?
(b) Or is it on a service that is both subscription and advertiser
supported (in other words, some users don’t pay a monthly fee but
instead listen to commercials), like Spotify?
(c) Is it on YouTube’s free service, where it’s only advertiser supported?
(d) Is it a clip on TikTok, which is only advertiser supported?

(e) Is it on Pandora, which has a whole di erent calculation?
(f) Is it outside the United States? If so, the amount you get varies from
territory to territory.
We’ll discuss all this in depth a bit later (on page 238), but you can see
there are so many variables that there’s no easy rule. For example, you’ll
get much more per stream on Apple Music than you will on Spotify,
because the advertising generates much less per subscriber than a
subscription does, and the majority of Spotify users don’t pay a
subscription fee (though at the time of this writing, the ratio of free to
paid Spotify users is approaching 50/50 in the U.S.). And in last place,
because YouTube’s free service and TikTok are only advertiser
supported, they generate substantially less per stream.
As a VERY rough rule of thumb, I’ve heard gures thrown around in
the range of $3,500 to $5,000 for each million streams, again depending
on where the streams are. This is the amount that goes to the record
label, meaning your share of that is equal to your royalty percentage. For
example, if you had a 10% royalty, you’d get $350 to $500 for each
million streams.
Please don’t put a lot of stock in these gures. They may well be out
of date by the time you read this, and even more importantly, there’s no
accurate way to answer the question without plugging in your speci c
streaming situation.
A major concern for artists in calculating streaming income has to do
with an issue we call at source. “At source” came from a game that was
played years ago in the publishing world. It had mostly died, or at least
was handled openly, but it has been spectacularly resurrected for the
streaming era by some record companies.
We’ll talk about this more in the publishing section (on page 268),
but the essence of the “at source” issue is that a multinational company’s
foreign a liates take a percentage of the streaming income before it
comes back to the United States, and therefore the artist isn’t paid on
100% of what the streaming service pays. For example, Apple Music pays

$100 to your company’s a liate in France. The French company takes
25% of the money, and sends $75 back to the United States. When the
company applies your rate to the streaming money, you only get a
percentage of the $75, not the $100. And as you’ll see in Chapter 12,
you may also have a reduced royalty rate in foreign territories. So it’s a
double hit.
The companies argue that this deduction is to cover the pro t margin
of their a liate, which is doing marketing, promotion, etc., in that
market. Not untrue, but then again, it’s one big company and all the
money ultimately ends up in one pocket. And even without the
deduction, the company gets the majority of the money.
More and more, the majors will pay streaming “at source” worldwide
for new deals, but you should be sure that’s in your contract. And if
you’re signing to an independent label, who doesn’t own a foreign
company, or signing with anyone else who won’t agree to an “at source”
royalty, you should limit the percentage that the foreign company can
charge. For example, say that the a liate can’t take more than 15% to
20% before it sends the money back to the United States. And also try for
a higher royalty rate in those territories.
The other exception to “at source” is legacy artists, with old contracts.
In the olden days, record companies paid artists 50% of the net receipts
they got when they licensed your recordings to third parties. At that
time, these provisions mostly covered licensing songs for movies, TV
shows, and the like. However, since streaming is a license, these old deals
entitle artists to 50% of the company’s net receipts from streaming,
which is much higher than their royalty rate for physical and downloads.
In response to this, the labels take a very large intra-company reduction
—meaning their foreign a liates take a chunk before sending the money
to the U.S.—in the range of 30% to 50%, sometimes even higher, before
applying the artist’s 50%. As you can quickly gure out, that is hazardous
to the health of your pocketbook.
2. Downloads/CDs. At the time of this writing, the wholesale price of
digital downloads is 70% of the retail price (so if it’s $9.99 retail, the

wholesale price is just under $7.00; if it’s $10.99 retail, wholesale is about
$7.69). Most top-line CDs sell for a wholesale price of about $8.50, and
vinyl is all over the place, given that the packaging and quality can vary
so much.
So to gure the number of pennies you’ll get, multiply your royalty
rate times those amounts. For example, if you have a 20% royalty, and
the wholesale price of your album is $8.50, then:
PPD (wholesale price)
Royalty rate
ROYALTY (ROUNDED TO PENNY)

$8.50
× 20%
$1.70

Remember (as we discussed on page 84) that this can be reduced by 10% or
more on physical product for special campaign free goods.
And note that some companies now pay based on their gross revenue less
taxes (as opposed to PPD).

Escalations
It’s common to escalate royalties based on sales. And yes, some contracts still say
that the escalations are based on album sales, even though physical sales and
downloads are falling like fruit ies (for purposes of determining escalations, the
formula does include the STEAs we discussed on page 92). Historically,
escalations were 1% at Gold (500,000 album equivalent sales) and another 1% at
Platinum (1 million). So, for example, if your royalty is 20%, it would escalate
to 21% for sales over 500,000, and to 22% for sales over one million.
However, most of the companies have done away with the sales calculation
and now do escalations based on revenue, rather than sales. For example, they’ll
say you get 1% when the company’s revenue from your recordings hits $5
million, and another 1% at $10 million. You should try to get these gures
down to $3.5 million and $7 million, but expect some pushback on this. You’ll
likely end up somewhere in the middle.
These escalations are for U.S. sales only (and they only escalate royalties in
the U.S.). So the revenue to trigger the escalations is limited to the U.S. As your

bargaining power goes up, so does your ability to get escalations in other major
territories (such as Canada and certain European markets) based on sales or
revenue in those markets. Because these are smaller markets, the escalation sales
levels in each are lower.
The revenue for determining escalations is your total money from
streaming, physical sales, and downloads. Can you gure out what’s missing
from those categories? We haven’t covered it yet, so don’t feel bad if you can’t.
The answer is at the end of this section (on page 103).
Escalations only apply to sales occurring after the level is reached, and are
therefore called prospective escalations. For example, if you have 20% on the
rst $4 million of revenue, escalating to 21% thereafter, you don’t get 21% on
the rst $4 million.

“All-in”
The above royalties are known by the industry term all-in, which means the
artist is responsible, out of his or her royalty, for paying the record producer, the
mixer, and any guest artist. (Producers’ and mixers’ roles, and how they’re paid,
are discussed in Chapter 11. However, I suggest you wait ’til we get there before
tackling the subject unless you’re already familiar with royalty calculations.)
The practice of paying artists an all-in rate began in the early 1970s and has
been the industry norm ever since (excluding a few oddball situations, like in
classical and sometimes in country music). Accordingly, the all-in rate is not
what the artist puts in his or her pocket; that amount is the all-in rate minus the
amount paid to the producers, mixers, and any guest artists, which is called the
net rate or net royalty.

ADVANCES
In the 1950s, artists would go to the studio, sing their little hearts out, and have
almost no other involvement in the creative process. It took maybe two weeks
to do an album; three if you were a perfectionist; four if you were a pain in the
ass. (A fast-track album today takes six to eight weeks, and more typical is three

or four months. Artists who are more established, and therefore busy touring,
promoting, or generally being persnickety, can take a year or more to nish an
album.)
In the early days, companies paid the artist a set amount of money as an
advance (for example, $10,000 for an album). The record company paid all the
recording costs (which are recoupable from royalties, just like the advance), and
everybody went their separate ways.
But nowadays we don’t much do it like that…

Funds
Today, most recording agreements are structured as funds. A fund is a set
amount of money, which includes both recording costs and any amounts that
may be payable to the artist as an advance. Whatever the artist doesn’t spend on
recording costs goes into his or her pocket. For example, if the recording fund
for an album is $200,000, and the recording costs are $150,000, the artist
pockets $50,000 as an “advance.” On the other hand, if the recording costs are
$200,000, the artist pockets nothing.
Here’s a rough range of all-in recording funds:
1. Minor Heat, Signing to Independent Company: Zero to $25,000,
occasionally more.
2. Minor Heat, Signing to Major: A fund in the range of $250,000 to
$500,000, occasionally running higher if you’re pretty hot. If you’re
urban/hip-hop, or a pop artist, the deals (at least for the rst album) are
often advances plus recording costs. (We’ll discuss the range of those
advances in the next section.)
3. Moderate/Heavy Heat: $1 million to $1.5 million, with a few
particularly hot artists kicking up even more. It’s directly proportionate
to your heat and the FOMO of the bidders. Thank you, TikTok…
4. Superstar: $2 million and up. Sometimes WAY up. A really big artist’s
fund can run into a lot more millions of dollars. For established artists,

funds are computed on the basis of past track record and future
expectations, as well as the frenzy in the marketplace.

Advances
As we discussed, fund deals are the norm in the record biz, except for hip-hop
artists, and for pop artists (balladeers, crooners, adolescent boy bands, etc.). I
know it’s bizarre to think those two worlds have similar deals, but hey, it’s
showbiz. For the urban/pop deals, it’s common for artists to have pure advances
plus a mutually approved recording budget. How come? Well, as you’ll see
when we discuss producer deals (on page 123), hip-hop and pop producers get
truckloads of money, and the albums get very expensive. This means
contractual funds (if they’re within the orbit of the earth) won’t be enough to
record an album, much less leave any money for the artist. So, at least for the
rst album, some companies give hop-hop and pop artists an advance plus
mutually agreed recording costs. These advances are typically in the range of
$50,000 to $200,000, but can go way higher if there’s heat.
After the rst album, these deals are usually funds.

Budget Woes
If you have a fund of $200,000, what keeps you from recording a super-cheapo
album for $25,000 and pocketing $175,000? In all of these deals (unless you
have a lot of bargaining power), the record company has to approve the budget
for your recording costs, precisely for this reason. Well, partly for this reason.
Actually, they’re more worried about the other end—that you’ll set an
unrealistically low budget and not be able to nish your album for less than the
fund. This is particularly common with new artists, because their contractual
recording funds are lower. For example, albums can easily cost $250,000 or
more, and that could be the entire fund. Moreover, if you’re using producers of
any note, that can radically jack up the price. As we’ll see when we get to
Chapter 11, top producers can get advances of $80,000 per track, and I’m sure
you can see how quickly this turns into a giant sucking sound.

So what happens when you’ve spent your full recording fund and have
three-quarters of an album? Historically, most of the record companies paid to
nish the record, under the age-old business strategy of “What the hell are we
going to do with three-quarters of an album?”
But this is changing radically.
In recent years, companies are more and more “testing the market” by
releasing product before committing to a full album, and in the pop world, this
is already close to becoming the norm. For example, they might release one
song, or submit a song to a test group, to see what kind of reaction it gets. If it’s
only moderate, they might rinse and repeat. Or hit the garbage disposal button.
It’s also becoming common in the pop world to release a few singles or an
EP (standing for extended play), which is ve to seven tracks (though those
may be released as a series of singles). If the record company likes the way things
go, they’ll do an album. If not, it’s back to Poughkeepsie.
In hip-hop, the trend is to release a large number of tracks at the same time
(for example, some artists have released twenty-four or more songs at once), or
if the tracks aren’t all released at the same time, they’ll come out over a short
period. It’s also common to release multiple albums per year, particularly if
there are mixtapes. Mixtape has a fuzzy meaning. Originally, mixtapes were (a)
mixes of other people’s records with your music, (b) given away for free, and (c)
called underground because they didn’t bother to get permission from other
people to use their music (we’ll talk more about what you’re supposed to do on
page 262). Since the people who created that other music weren’t exactly
thrilled, and they had a nasty habit of suing everyone, including the record
company, there are very few true (if any) underground mixtapes anymore.
Instead, mixtapes are now released only after the label has legally cleared the
rights, meaning there’s no real di erence between a mixtape and any other
album (except that you decided to call it a “mixtape”). The occasional, truly
underground, uncleared mixtapes usually come from artists acting on their
own (at least until they get slapped a few times).
So looking at the big picture, you can see that the model of the past—record
an album every few years, get an advance—is falling apart. Nowadays, it’s a few
tracks in the pop world, then maybe an album (at least in the beginning), and in

hip-hop, it’s releasing massive product as fast as you can get it out. This is
particularly relevant to the question of how much product you’re required to
deliver under your record deal, which we’ll cover on page 107.

Formulas
If you know enough to ask for it, most record companies will agree to
something called a formula for advances. This is a mechanism designed to
automatically increase (or decrease) your deal if you’re successful (or a op). It
works like this:
Your advance for the second album is equal to a percentage (usually 70% to
75%) of all royalties earned (as opposed to paid) by the rst album under the
agreement. The advance for album number three is a percentage of album
number two’s earnings, and so forth. For example, if the rst album earns
$1,000,000 in royalties and you have a 70% formula, the advance for the second
album is $700,000. The di erence between earned and paid is that “earnings”
are what the album generates, while “payment” is what you get after you recoup
all the costs and advances from those earnings. So earnings could be millions for
the formula computation even though you’ve been paid much less.
Sometimes the formula is an average of the prior two albums’ earnings,
which is better for the company because if one album spikes and the other is soso, the formula is reduced.
Formulas generally use only earnings in the United States, plus other
territories if you can negotiate that (try for the world, but at least try to include
Canada and the United Kingdom). Also, it’s only earnings in those territories
from (a) the streaming of tracks included in the album, (b) sales of the album
(physical or download), and (c) single-song downloads of tracks from the
album. Can you gure out what’s missing? It’s the same thing that was missing
from the escalation formula, and we still haven’t covered it yet, so hang on until
page 103.
Formulas only count earnings that happen within a certain period of time
(usually twelve to eighteen months after release), so that sales trickling in over a

two- or three-year period won’t increase the advance for an artist who is slow in
delivery. The last thing a company wants to reward is late delivery.
If you can’t get a formula right away, try to get it on the third or a later
album.
But what happens, you say, if the rst album is a dismal failure, and earns
only $20,000? How can anyone make an album for $14,000 (70% of the
$20,000)? Well, you can’t, so this is handled by establishing a oor in the
formula. A oor means that no matter how lousy the earnings of the previous
album, your fund will not be less than an agreed amount (the ﬂoor). Not
surprisingly, as soon as record companies hear the word “ oor,” they think of a
concept called a ceiling, which means that no matter how wildly successful the
prior album, the fund won’t exceed an agreed dollar gure. (The prospect of
owing you $8 million for an album makes them nervous.)
Some companies want to reduce your fund if you’re unrecouped, by
deducting the unrecouped balance from your formula advance. They argue
that this saves them from disaster if you have a big album after a series of losers.
For example, suppose the formula for your next album has a oor of $200,000,
and a ceiling of $600,000, and your last album earned enough to hit the
maximum $600,000. However, all your albums before that last one were
turkeys, so you’re $450,000 unrecouped. Under this provision, the company
deducts $450,000 from the $600,000 formula advance and pays you $150,000
(even though your oor was $200,000).
One slight problem with this clause: If you were $800,000 unrecouped in
the above example, subtracting that amount would eat up your entire $600,000
fund, and you’d get zippo. The same thing would happen if you were $300,000
unrecouped and only quali ed for the oor advance of $200,000 (from which
they’d subtract the $300,000). Since it’s pretty hard to make a record for zero,
you have to tell the company you need something called a sub oor (meaning a
oor below the oor). For example, your contract might say you get the
formula advance, less any unrecouped amount, but not less than a sub oor of
$125,000. (We’ll discuss a similar concept in songwriter deals on page 302.)
Historically, both the oors and ceilings escalated for later albums, varying
with the bargaining power of the parties. A recent trend is for companies to

keep the oors at the same level (with maybe slight increases) and only escalate
the ceilings, to protect the company’s downside. Here’s a recent new artist deal:
Album No.
1
2
3
4

Floor
$300,000
$300,000
$350,000
$400,000

Ceiling
(no formula)
$600,000
$700,000
$800,000

Don’t get excited about the big numbers for the last albums. The company
isn’t really committed to them, as you’ll see on page 109.
When the deal is for an advance that goes directly into the artist’s pocket (not
a recording fund), the formula percentage is of course much less, usually in the
15% to 20% range. The oors and ceilings for option years would go up in
roughly the same percentages as the funds. For example, a formula for the third
album might be 15% of the prior album’s earnings, not less than $125,000, or
more than $250,000.
Answer to question: So what earnings are missing from the formulas for
escalations and funds? Licenses to use your recordings in commercials, or in
movies or TV shows (we’ll talk about this on page 160). The reason it’s not
included is that these can be one-o types of things, and therefore skew the
formula for your next album over something that may not repeat.

360 RIGHTS
Welcome to the land of 360 deals. You may not like the climate.
The name comes from the 360 degrees in a circle, because record companies
want to share in the total pie of an artist’s income (or maybe it’s because they
want to corral you). Under these deals, the companies get a piece of an artist’s
earnings from touring, songwriting, merchandising, fan clubs, sponsorship
money, motion picture acting, modeling, garage sales, and so forth. (Okay, I
made up the garage sales part to see if you’re paying attention. Don’t tell the
record companies, or they’ll include them in their next contract.)

These deals started because the record industry was in such nancial distress
in the early 2000s that the companies couldn’t survive on their record business
alone. So they grabbed pieces of other income. Their argument (the
sugarcoating on the 360 grab) goes like this: “In this new world, we are no
longer just a record company, con ned to a narrow lane. We are now an artist
brand-building company. Of all the players in your life, we are the only ones
who spend substantial money to make you a household name. Then, thanks to
our rocket launch, you make tons of money by touring, songwriting, selling
your face to teenagers on T-shirts, etc. This isn’t right. We should share in all the
businesses we help build for you. Besides, we’ll have a much bigger incentive to
spend money on you if we know we have an upside beyond records. Oh, and
one other thing. We won’t sign you if you don’t agree.”
Whatever you think of the sugar, 360 deals are still around because record
companies like making more money (as do most of us). Thus, from the major
labels down to the independents, virtually all the companies want some kind of
360 rights. The good news is that their asks have come down in recent years,
and generally they’re in the range of 15% (some try 20%), except for touring,
where it’s 7.5% to 10% for reasons we’ll discuss in a bit.
Having said that, if you generate a lot of heat before you make a record deal,
and lots of labels are chasing you, the 360 turns into a 0. If not all the way to
zero, you can trim them way back, both as to areas and the percentages.
It’s relatively easy to exclude songwriting/publishing from 360 rights, but
you gotta ask. If you do get them out, your label will likely want a matching
right. That means, if you want to make a deal for songs you write (we’ll discuss
those deals in Chapter 18), you come to them rst and o er to let them match
the terms. If they do match, you have to sign to their publishing company. This
is not really good for you; it’s hard to shop around if all the publishers know
your record company can swoop in and take the deal. Next step up (for you;
step down for the record company) is a rst negotiaton. That means you talk
to them rst, and if you can’t make a deal, you can go elsewhere. And the
ultimate is that they get none of the above.
Another area that’s easy to exclude is if you already have a non-music career
before making the deal, say as an actor or model.

You can often also knock out merchandising, branding, and endorsements,
though if the record company brings you a branding opportunity, it’s fair to
pay them for it (they’ll want 10% to 15%).
And of course you should try to reduce the percentages (at least to 10%,
sometimes less, and maybe 5% on touring, which we’ll discuss separately
because it has a lot of peculiarities).
The de nition of your “net income” (against which the company’s 360
percentage applies) is the source of some debate in making these deals. Artists
want to deduct as much as possible before paying the record company, and,
shockingly, the record companies want to limit these deductions. Except for
tours (which we’ll discuss in a second), the language is usually something like
“gross receipts less customary, third-party, arm’s-length expenses.” They say
“third party” to keep you from cutting your brother in for a chunk, which he
gives back to you in a brown paper bag. They say “arm’s length” to make sure
the expenses aren’t any higher than you would pay in the open market.
Most companies put a limit on the total commissions you can pay your
representatives (manager, agent, lawyer, and business manager) in computing
“net income.” This cap is usually around 30% to 35% of your gross earnings,
though at least one company tries to cap commissions at 35% of net (meaning
35% of your gross income after deducting all expenses other than commissions).
If the cap is based on your gross earnings, 35% is probably okay, guring 15%
for a manager, 10% for an agent, and 10% to cover both the attorney and
business manager. (Note: If your lawyer and business manager are not on a
percentage, make sure the language allows you to deduct their cost. Some
contracts only say you can deduct “commissions.” Of course, if the company
agrees to your deducting fees that are not commissions, the 30% to 35%
limitation on deductions still applies.) If you go over the cap—for example, if
you’re paying your manager 20%, and you can’t keep the others down—you
should ask the record company to increase their cap to re ect reality. Results
will vary with bargaining power.
You can of course pay commissions that exceed the cap, but you don’t get to
deduct the excess in computing what you owe the record company. So it’s a
double hit.

If the commission cap is 35% of your net earnings, that’s much more of a
ght, because there’s a good chance you’ll go over it. This is less of a worry for
non-touring income, because the expenses aren’t as signi cant. For example, the
money you get from a publishing company is after they’ve already taken their
expenses, so your “gross income” is already a kind of “net.” Thus, you can
probably craft some variation of this that’s livable.
The “net income” discussion gets particularly thorny when you talk about
tours. The companies have two worries:
1. As you’ll see when we discuss touring (in Chapter 23), artists are lucky to
take home a fraction of their gross income, and when you’re a new artist,
you’ll likely lose money. So the record company is worried that their
share of net will mean little or nothing. (Of course, you’re not doing so
well, either.)
2. At the other end, when you start to make some real dough on the road,
the companies worry that you’ll charge lots of questionable goodies
against your tour income, for the purpose of reducing the amount you
have to pay them.
To keep you from playing games, most companies now insist on a
percentage of your gross income from touring, before you deduct any expenses
or commissions at all (the same way an agent is paid). The gross percentage is of
course smaller (they’ll start at 10% but you should get them down to 5% or
7.5%). However, some companies will let you deduct production expenses,
such as sound and lights. But they’re very limited deductions.
Most importantly, you should negotiate a shelter, which means they don’t
take their percentage of touring monies under a certain dollar amount. For
example, they don’t get paid on the rst $500,000 to $1 million of your income
during each contract period (or, better for you, each touring cycle). When you
earn more than the shelter, you pay the company a percentage of the excess.
Even if your touring is pro table, paying the company on gross could mean
they make more from your tours than you do. And of course if you’re not
pro table, it’s a seriously heavy burden. As a practical matter, if you can’t a ord

it, they will usually work with you. But you should get the best protections you
can up front.

Active and Passive Interests
The record company’s 360 share is usually what’s called a passive interest,
meaning the company has no control over the rights involved. In other words,
you make whatever kind of deal you want with someone else, collect the
money, and then write them a check for their share.
Some companies also want the right to operate your fan club and/or VIP
ticketing (see page 406 for what that is), and these are called active rights
because the company is actually doing something. They may also want you to
perform a certain number of shows as your promoter, meaning produce your
live concerts in some territories. Try to resist both of these.

If you’re on the Fast Track and haven’t decided to leave the
music business, go to Chapter 11 on page 123. Everyone else,
forward ho…

IF YOU DON’T UNDERSTAND THE WORDS IN THE BOX, IT MEANS
YOU SKIPPED PAGES 8–9. IT ALSO MEANS YOU NEVER READ THE
DIRECTIONS WHEN YOU BUY A NEW ELECTRONIC DEVICE.

10
Other Major Deal Points

The other major things you’ll want to know about your record deal are “How
much?” and “How long?” The “how much” part of this doesn’t mean royalties
and advances, which we already discussed, but rather the number of recordings
you have to make. The “how long” part means the period of time that the deal
lasts, which sounds pretty straightforward but has taken some strange twists
over the years.

AMOUNT OF PRODUCT
Commitments vs. Options
Record deals are traditionally structured with the company having the smallest
obligation it can negotiate, while keeping the option to get as much product as
possible. For example, a company may commit to record a few tracks or an
album of an artist, then have the option to require an additional three or four
albums, each one at the company’s election. Albums that the company is
required to record are called rm albums. The others are called optional or
option albums.
As we discussed on page 100, the whole concept of how much product an
artist delivers is changing. As of this writing, we haven’t settled on a new norm,
and most companies are still writing deals based on albums. One major label

does some contracts for a speci c number of recordings rather than albums, but
the others have yet to follow.

Options in New Artist Deals
The major companies want the right to get a total of four to ve albums over
the course of your deal (indies will often agree to a maximum of three or four,
sometimes even less). This is an improvement over the past—companies used to
insist on options for eight to ten albums. You should keep the number down,
ideally to three, but you may have to live with four.
The company wants the right to these optional albums one at a time. With a
lot of clout, you can sometimes make them take two at a time (called two rm
in industry lingo), but this has become harder for new artists unless you’ve got
major heat. If you don’t get two rm at the beginning, you might try for it later
in the deal. For example, they can pick up album number two individually, but
if they go on with the deal, they have to take three and four as a package. Can’t
hurt to ask for this, but don’t take it personally if you don’t get it.
If you have a lot of heat, and the company does commit to two albums from
the git-go, it may ask for the right to bail out if the rst album tanks, using a
technique lovingly known as a disaster clause. For example, if the rst album
generates revenue of less than $1 million, the company is no longer committed
to the second album. Or you could get to the same place by stating it another
way: The second album is optional, but the company is required to exercise its
option if the rst album generates $1 million or more.
As we’ll discuss in a bit, I’m talking here about the number of newly
recorded studio albums (meaning recorded in a studio) you’ll have to deliver.
This does not include live albums (see page 119), Greatest Hits albums (see page
119), specialty albums (Christmas, Halloween, Polka Parade), side projects,
duets (because you’re not the featured artist), or the like.

Options in Midrange and Superstar Deals

As discussed earlier, if you’re scoring high on the Heat-O-Meter, and lots of
hounds are chasing you, the company may commit to two albums ﬁrm, and get
options for additional albums (each option would require them to record one or
two albums). Even if they actually commit to two albums, however, as noted
above, they may want the right to bail if the rst album tanks.
It’s rare that a company doesn’t have the right to at least three albums from
this level of artist, and they prefer four. I prefer less.
At the superstar level, deals of only three albums are possible, and at least two
of those albums are typically rm.
A few huge artists (and at the other end, a hot new artist signing to an indie
label) have made deals for one album only, but this is extremely rare.

Options Aren’t Good for You
I remember a friend of mine from the high school choir who came in one day,
jubilant, because she had signed a “ten-album deal” with Capitol Records. In
reality, it turned out to be a deal for only one single, and she had merely given
Capitol the option to require up to ten albums. While my friend faded from the
music biz after recording that one single, her attitude was not unusual. Many
artists still think that record company options are good for them (the numbers
are so high at the end!). But in fact, options are only good for the record
company. If you’re a op, you’ll never see the money; if you’re a success, it’ll
probably be less than you’re worth. So train yourself to think of options as
nothing more than a chance for the record company to get out of your deal.
They are never good for you.

Making the Best of Options
Despite my high-minded speech, the reality is that you have to live with options
at all but major-heat and superstar levels—this industry custom is too well
entrenched to buck. However, since you’re giving the company a chance to
drop you after each album or two (in other words, to protect their rear ends if

there’s no success), I think you’re entitled to more goodies if they keep you.
This can be done in two di erent ways:
Royalties. For optional albums, you should get better royalties. Typically, the
increase is 1%, both in your basic rate and in any escalated rates. So if your deal
in the rst period was 20%, with an escalation to 21% at a certain revenue level,
recordings made in the option period would be 21% escalating to 22%.
Funds. You should also get increased recording funds for optional albums.
Page 102 cites an example of a new-artist deal, and here are the numbers from a
midlevel deal:
Album No.
1
2
3
4

Floor
$750,000
$750,000
$800,000
$850,000

Ceiling
(no formula)
$1,100,000
$1,600,000
$1,700,000

Don’t the numbers look delicious in the later option periods? What a great
deal! What a genius negotiator! DON’T BE FOOLED! OPTIONS ARE
NEVER GOOD FOR YOU!! They only mean you’ll get dropped if you’re not
worth the price, or you’ll get too little if you’re a smash. So repeat after me:
“OPTIONS ARE NEVER GOOD FOR ME!!!” Now write it on the
blackboard twenty- ve times.

Pay or Play
So you have a deal for an album. Let’s hit the studio. Right?
Well, not so fast, pardner.
Virtually no record deal ever requires the company to actually make a
record.
Huh?
Yep. And this is not only true for new artists, but also for midlevel and
superstars.

Almost all contracts contain a provision that says the company, instead of
recording an album, can merely pay you a sum of money. This is called a payor-play provision, meaning, as the name implies, that the record company has
the option either to allow you to “play” your music or to “pay” you o .
The amount you get for pay-or-play is negotiable. In the rst draft of the
agreement, it might say minimum union scale for an album (see page 88 for
what union scale means), but you want to try for the amount of your recording
fund less the recording costs of your last album. That’s what you’d make if you
actually recorded an album and it sti ed (which could only happen because the
company didn’t do their job, of course…). Sometimes the company will agree to
that amount, but with a oor and ceiling (we discussed this on page 102). Or
sometimes it’s just a negotiated amount.
Apart from beating them up for the most pay-or-play money, you also want
to be sure that, once they pay you o , the deal is over. This shouldn’t be hard to
get, but it isn’t in a lot of form agreements, and without it, the company could
hold on to you without making records. (On the other hand, since they don’t
want your records, they probably don’t want you around either. But it’s cheap
insurance to add language making sure.)
In the real world (where I attempt to live, at least most of the time), this ends
up being a negotiation when they want to drop you. The record company
wants you to sign a contract that says you won’t sue them (these contracts are
known as releases because they release the record company from all obligations
to you), and in exchange they give you a chunk of money. You can sometimes
get back your unreleased recordings, but that usually involves paying the label
for their costs plus some kind of royalty if you use the recordings.

HOW LONG?
Term
How long the record company keeps you under an exclusive agreement is called
the term of your deal. Record deals used to be for a term of one year, with
options to renew for additional periods of one year each. These segments of the

term are also called terms, or sometimes periods, such as the initial term ( rst
year), ﬁrst option period (second year), etc. In the olden days, an artist was
usually obligated to deliver two albums during each year. That worked
terri cally back when records were banged out like pancakes, since most of the
time artists just showed up, sang, then went back to the beach. As we discussed,
in those days it was not unusual to make an album in a few weeks.
Every contract is a history lesson, and the contractual language dealing with
the length of deals has a particularly colorful past. Behind each clause is a story
that ends with “I’m going to write something that makes sure I won’t get
shafted if this happens again.” And unraveling these bits of history can be fun,
so let’s take a look.

Late Delivery of Albums
As artists took more creative control, albums took longer to make. Indeed, the
more successful the artist, the longer (with of course exceptions) the recording
process. Today, some superstar pop artists take years between albums (as do
akes at any level). Many reasons for this are legitimate—if an album is
successful, you need to be out touring and promoting it, which means you
can’t be in the studio. In fact, the more successful it is, the longer you’ll be out
touring and promoting, and the record company won’t even want you to start
the next album. (Hip-hop is a totally di erent story, as we’ll discuss in a minute.
And of course there are proli c superstars who turn out albums frequently).
Unfortunately, many of these delays don’t have such a noble purpose. I’m
convinced (but can’t prove) that one of the reasons for delay is that artists,
particularly following a major success, are a bit frightened to put out their next
record. When it’s actually released, they have to nd out whether it does as well
as the prior one; until then, it’s only speculation and their fabulous track record
stays intact. So, they continue to ne-tune, tweak, poke, re-record, rethink, etc.,
which delays the day of reckoning. And second albums are particularly
troublesome. If you think about it, someone’s rst album can actually be ve
years or more in the making. That’s because they were accumulating songs for a
long time before they ever got a record deal, and thus had a huge catalog to

choose from in making the rst album. However, when an artist gets to the
second album, all the cherries have been picked, so it’s a matter of writing new
material or going into the second tier of old stu . And this process has to take
place within a year or two, so you don’t lose the career momentum of the rst
album. That’s in stark contrast to the unlimited time that preceded the rst
album. So there’s much more pressure on the second go-round.
Record companies historically solved this slow-delivery problem by having
the right to extend the term of the agreement if an album wasn’t delivered on
time. In other words, if your album was six months late, the current one-year
term of your deal was extended by six months. This worked terri cally until
Olivia Newton-John led a suit against MCA Records seeking termination of
her agreement. (The case cite is MCA Records, Inc. vs. Newton-John, 90 Cal.App
3d. 18 [1979], for you technical freaks who like to read court cases.) In this case,
she argued that her deal should be limited to the actual number of years stated
in the contract, without regard to any extensions. In other words, since her
contract was for a two-year term with three one-year options (a total of ve
years), she argued that MCA couldn’t enforce the deal beyond ve years from
the start date, even if she hadn’t given them all the product due. To everyone’s
surprise, the court (sort of) agreed. It reduced the duration of MCA’s
injunction (meaning the court order that said she couldn’t record for anyone
else) to the ve years, rather than allowing any extensions. However, I said “sort
of” because the ve years weren’t over at the time of the case, and so the court
technically didn’t deal with the issue in full. Nonetheless, the case’s language
was strong enough to make all the companies nervous, and it forever changed
the way record contracts are drawn.
The result was that, since the Newton-John case, the terms of record deals
have not been stated in speci c time periods like one or two years. Instead, the
contracts say each period ends twelve months after release of the last album
required for that period, but that the term is no less than a speci ed minimum
(e.g., eighteen months) from the time it starts. For example, if you’re required
to record one album, the period might start upon signing your deal and end
twelve months after release of that album, but no sooner than eighteen months
after signing. And what happens if they never release your album? Will you still

be under contract when you’re in Golden Acres Retirement Hotel and Spa? To
guard against that, you’ll want the term to end on the sooner of twelve months
after release or fteen months after delivery of the album.
So now recording contracts don’t end until a certain period of time
following delivery of the last required product. This concept nicely solved the
Olivia Newton-John problem, but the companies needed to add additional
provisions to deal with this little snippet of history: In 1970, Dean Martin
signed an agreement with Warner Records. The agreement was unusual for
those days (although it’s the norm today) because the term continued until
delivery of all the albums. About six years later, after everyone had forgotten
about him, Dino came in and announced he was about to start recording a new
album (for which he expected the substantial amount of money required in the
contract). This sent Warner into a tizzy, since Mr. Martin’s star was not of the
same brightness as when he signed the deal, and they began scrambling to nd a
way out. So Dino sued them. Ultimately the case was settled, but it taught the
companies a lesson—contracts shouldn’t be geared only to delivery of albums,
or else they can go on forever.
Because of this, you’ll now nd contractual provisions that say companies
can get out of a deal if the artist doesn’t deliver an album within a speci c time
period after delivery of the previous album. In other words, if you’re late more
than a certain amount of time (usually twelve to eighteen months, depending
on bargaining power), they can terminate your deal. But they don’t have to
whack you. Even if you’re late, if they want to keep you under the deal, they can
sit back and wait.
On top of the right to terminate, record companies also have the right to
reduce your advance on the next album. For example, a common provision
reduces your advance by 5% for every month that you’re late. Note this is 5% of
the recording fund, not just the di erence between costs and the fund (which
would be the money you keep). So being late could eat up your entire in-pocket
advance. For example, if you’re recording fund is $100,000 and it will cost you
$90,000 to record, you have $10,000 for yourself. The 5% penalty, however,
applies to the $100,000, meaning a $5,000 reduction for every month you’re

late. Meaning your pocket money is gone after only two months. And of course
this also reduces what’s left for recording costs.
Here’s how we try to soften this penalty:
1. The 5% reduction only applies to unpaid monies, not anything you
already got. The form agreement will say 5% of the entire fund, which
includes monies you got when you started recording, as well as
recording costs. So, for example, if you got $25,000 when you started
recording, and there’s $75,000 left to pay, the 5% reduction only applies
to the $75,000 (not the full $100,000).
2. If there’s a formula for the fund (see page 102), try to say that the
reduction can’t take you below the minimum of the formula. Of course,
if all you’re getting for this album’s fund is the minimum under the
formula, that means there’s no reduction. Labels don’t like this; they
want something that will hurt if you’re late.
Apart from the nancial penalty, as we rst discussed, the form contract also
says that the label can get out of the deal if you’re late. We try to soften this by
saying the company can’t terminate your deal unless you’re more than six
months late. They can still reduce the advance, starting on the date you’re late,
but they can’t bail on you completely for a few more months.
So… because of Dean and Olivia, (a) the term goes on until you deliver, and
(b) you’re shafted if you deliver late. Does that take care of everything? Not
quite…
Next comes a history lesson from Frank Zappa (you probably wouldn’t
think Zappa was the guy to rst anticipate hip-hop practices, but…).
Mr. Zappa owed Warner Records four albums and badly wanted out of his
deal. So one day he showed up with four albums tucked under his arm and
announced he was delivering all the remaining product required under his
contract. Thus, says Mr. Z, “I’m now free to sign with another label.”
Warner was not thrilled.
The Zappa lesson is now handled by stating that you can’t even start
recording an album until you’ve delivered the prior album, and that the new

album can’t be delivered sooner than six months after delivery of the prior
album. This was legitimate enough in the past—historically, you couldn’t really
market more than one album at a time, and if an artist put an album on the
shelf for later release, it could well be out of touch with the current taste of the
music biz (which can change hourly) when it nally came out.
But today, certainly at least in the hip-hop world, “more is better,” meaning
artists release multiple albums at once, and these albums can have twenty or
more tracks. And often these batches are released very close to each other.
Wherever Mr. Zappa is, he’s probably smiling.
In the same way that the album concept is still included in record deals,
there’s no norm for this kind of blizzard delivery yet. As a practical matter, the
companies just sit and gure it out with each artist, depending on the situation.
The mantra for “more is better” came about because new product pumps your
overall streaming numbers. But if you deliver too much at once, they won’t
want to count all the product toward your delivery requirement (in other
words, delivering two albums of material at the same time only counts as one
album under the deal, so it only reduces what you’ll owe in the future by one
album). So be sure to work that out before you show up like Zappa.

DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS
Apart from the number of recordings, contracts also talk about the kind of
recordings you can deliver. Delivery is a magic word, because it means more
than dumping the stu on their doorstep, ringing the doorbell, and running
away before they answer. It means (a) you have to deliver a bunch of other junk
along with the recordings (artwork, licenses for the songs, deals with producers,
etc.) and (b) the company has to accept the recordings as complying with your
deal. Your contract will specify what standards the company can use in deciding
whether to accept the recordings, and the de nition of these standards depends
on your bargaining power. The extremes are:

Commercially Satisfactory

If your contract says you must deliver commercially satisfactory recordings, it
means the record company only has to take recordings it believes will do well in
the market; in other words, recordings it nds “satisfactory for commercial
exploitation” (translation: recordings it likes). If your contract has this language
and they don’t like your record, then (a) at best, they send you back to the
studio (at your expense), or (b) at worst, they say you haven’t delivered the
product required by your deal, which means you’re late, in breach of your
contract, and they can reduce your advance and/or terminate the deal.

Technically Satisfactory
At the other end of the spectrum is technically satisfactory. If you only have
to deliver technically satisfactory recordings, then as long as a recording is
technically well made, the company has to take it.
Technically satisfactory delivery standards are very rare today because of
abuses I’m sure you can imagine (for example, one of my record company
clients got an album that was supposed to be a secret group of superstars but
turned out to be a previously released op from an unknown group).
Newer artists can expect to live with commercially satisfactory. Midrange
artists may get a technically satisfactory standard, but it will be subject to the
company’s approving the songs and the producer, plus the same limits described
in the next two sentences. Superstars can expect an even more favorable version
of technically satisfactory: The company may not have any approvals, but it will
have language saying the recordings must be of a “style” (and perhaps even a
“quality”) similar to your previous recordings. They will also exclude any
“specialty” or “novelty” recordings, so you can’t give them a children’s record, a
Christmas record, the Johnny Mathis songbook (unless, of course, you are
Johnny Mathis), Gregorian chants, etc.

Other Delivery Criteria
The other requirements for your recordings (regardless of your level) are that
they must be:

1. Studio recordings (as opposed to “live” concert recordings—see page 119
for a discussion of “live” albums).
2. Recorded during the term (to keep you from pulling out those old
garage recordings).
3. Songs not previously recorded by you or someone else (I’m sure you can
gure out the history lesson behind this one).
4. Recordings that feature only your performance (to keep you from
bringing in the kids and your aunt Sally as guest soloists). If you’re a
group, it may say no less than X number of songs on each album must
be sung by the lead singer.
5. Not wholly instrumental selections (unless you’re only an
instrumentalist).
6. Songs of a minimum playing time (usually two minutes).
7. Material that doesn’t cause the company any legal hassles, such as
infringing somebody’s copyright (see page 330), defaming someone, or
using obscene language (to the extent that’s still possible).
In addition, you also have to deliver all the legal rights the record company
needs to exploit your recordings, such as producer agreements (we’ll talk about
those in Chapter 11), licenses to use the songs (Chapter 16), and sample
clearances (we’ll talk about samples on page 262).

GUARANTEED RELEASE
As we discussed on page 110, record contracts don’t build in an obligation to
record your records, much less a commitment to release them.
With even a little bargaining power (and with most companies as a matter of
practice), you can get a guaranteed release, which is also called a release
commitment. Bizarrely, this clause will never obligate the company to release
your records. It will, however, let you get out of the deal if they don’t.
As the CD’s heartbeat slowed and digital soared, these clauses became
meaningless. Historically, a guaranteed release required the company’s nancial
commitment to press CDs, ship them to stores, and do some level of marketing

(there was rarely a contractual marketing commitment, but if the company
wanted to see any of their money back, they had to give it a go). Now, when
“releasing” just means pushing the button on a digital le, it’s easy to get a
guaranteed release in every territory where your company has a deal with a DSP
for the company’s catalog (which is basically worldwide). But does that kind of
release mean anything?
Not really; it’s arguably no better than putting it out yourself. The real goal
is to have them market your music with some amount of energy, but that’s hard
to contractually require, especially if they hate your record. If you have some
heat when you make your deal, you can sometimes get a guaranteed marketing
commitment, or an agreement to spend a certain amount to promote your
records. Whatever’s in the contract, however, you can’t force them to market
your music with enthusiasm. So you have to hope they want to get back their
investment in you and therefore will put some e ort into pushing your records.
(Spoiler Alert: From the beginning of the music business, every artist feels their
record company should be doing more.)
But if they think your music is doggie doo-doo and won’t spend money and
won’t even bother pushing the digital button, it’s time to move along.
You can often get the right to buy back the unreleased album. Sometimes
you can build that right into your guaranteed release clause. But even if you
can’t, it can be worked out at the time—when the company comes to you and
says they want to unwind the deal, you say you want the recordings (unless you
agree that they’re excrement). After all, if the company doesn’t think enough of
it to put it out, why not let you take it elsewhere and get their money back? If
they agree, you’ll have to pay back their costs (be sure you only have to do that if
you have another deal), and probably give them a royalty override so the old
company doesn’t look like an idiot if your music explodes. (A royalty override
means the old company gets a royalty from the new company on your
recordings; it’s called an “override” because it sits on top of your royalty).

CONTROLLED COMPOSITIONS

Historically, one of the most important provisions of your record deal was the
controlled composition clause, which limits how much you get paid as a
songwriter. Due to some changes in the copyright law, this has become much
less important. But unfortunately, this clause hasn’t become that much less
complicated, and to understand it you need a pretty extensive knowledge of
publishing, which we’re going to discuss later. So let’s put it o until you have
more background info. (If you really can’t wait, ip ahead to page 275, but
you’ll get pretty confused if you don’t have a decent grasp on publishing.)
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track, go to Chapter 11 on page 123. Experts,
straight on…

GREATEST HITS
A Greatest Hits album (also called a Best of) is a compilation of songs from
your prior albums. (I’ve always been amused by the term Greatest Hits, since
the album is sometimes neither.)
Greatest Hits albums are on the endangered species list (somewhere between
the hawksbill turtle and the black-footed ferret). As streaming has soared,
Greatest Hits albums have nose-dived, and the reason is pretty simple: Everyone
is essentially making their own greatest hits by creating playlists on streaming
services. However, record company contracts still want the right to make
Greatest Hits albums, even though there really isn’t anything they can do with
them. Well, actually there’s one thing, called a box set, which we’ll discuss on
page 161). So for that reason, you should say the label has to get your consent
before they can release a Greatest Hits album—it gives you the right to approve
the tracks and artwork for the box set.

LIVE ALBUMS
A live album is recorded during a live concert (with lots of screaming and
applause), rather than in a studio. The popularity of these albums goes through

periodic ups and downs (sort of like musical movies). Currently it’s at a level I’d
call “Meh.” People who want live music now mostly go to YouTube or the
concert festival websites, so no one really cares about live albums.
Unless you’ve got a lot of muscle, record companies won’t let you deliver a
live album (or even one live cut on a studio album) without their consent. On
rare occasions, superstars can get the right to deliver one live album during the
term of their deal. But it’ll usually have a reduced advance, both because of live
records’ dicey success history and the fact that most of the songs have been
previously released.

INDEPENDENTS DAY
When the music biz started its decline in the year 2000, artists started making
more deals with independent record companies. That’s because the majors were
cutting back on deals, and also cutting back on employees—so a lot of people
who got laid o from the majors started indie labels. Since then, there’ve been
even more indie labels because the diminishing importance of physical records
makes it much easier to distribute music. Also, indies are happy with smaller
numbers because they make smaller bets and therefore don’t need to score as big
as the majors to succeed.
I think the spread of indies is incredibly healthy for the biz. It’s like the record
industry in the 1960s, when independent labels like A&M, Chrysalis, and
Island changed the face of music. Great music has always come from doing
things out of the mainstream. Keep at it!
As the independents grow stronger, however, their deals look more and
more like major label deals. But there are some di erences you should
understand, so let’s take a look. We’ll start with “true independents” (see page
73 for what that means), then mosey on over to major-distributed independents
that have little or no sta (and rely on a major label to do the heavy lifting).
Note this section deals with independents who sign artists to term record
deals, just like the majors. We’ll talk later about label services companies who
just act as your distributor and provide the services of a label (we discussed those
folks on page 77, and we’ll get into label service deals on page 210).

True Independents
1. As we already noted (on page 98), you get less of an advance from an
independent. Because a deal with them is like shopping in the bargain
basement, you should make up for it by giving them the lowest number
of albums possible. A few years ago, it wasn’t hard to limit independent
deals to one or two albums. Lately, as the independents’ muscles have
grown, so has their desire for more albums. So now they try to get as
many as four. See if you can keep it down to three, or even two if you’ve
got a lot of heat. As a general rule, the less money they’re guaranteeing,
the fewer albums they should get.
2. Some labels will give you 50% of their pro ts instead of a royalty. We’ll
discuss how pro ts are computed later (on page 163). For now, take my
word that a pro t share pays you a lot more money if you’re a big success
(though it could mean less money at midlevel). They may give you less
of an advance if you take a pro t share, but that’s not necessarily the case.
3. Most indie labels don’t have overseas operations, and therefore you have
to make sure that your records get marketed in those territories.
Sometimes you can even limit their rights to the United States only, and
make your own foreign deals.
4. Most independents, just like majors, want 360 rights (see page 103 for
what those are). They may also want to own some or all of your
publishing (your earnings as a songwriter, as opposed to your earnings as
a performer on records). Since we haven’t discussed publishing, I want
to defer the ins and outs of this until we do. The way to protect yourself
is on page 300 if you want to look ahead, but I suggest you do it only if
you understand publishing pretty well.

Major-Distributed Independents
When you’re recording for a major-distributed company that isn’t a true
independent, you have the same concerns we just discussed, plus a few added
goodies.

Some of these indies have an overall deal with a distributor, for all their
product, while others just make a deal with a major for each artist they sign, one
at a time. If your company doesn’t have an overall distribution deal with a
distributor, you have to ask whether this company can get anyone to distribute
and market your album. As we discussed on page 75, it’s not that hard to get
your music out digitally, but of course you could do that yourself. The idea is to
get a real distributor, with marketing skills and sta , behind your music. If you
have some clout, you should say that the company must enter into an
agreement with a major distributor, to make sure it’s a legit company. In
addition, and even if the company doesn’t agree to a major distributor, you
want to say that the indie has to make a distribution deal within a certain period
of time, such as six months after execution of the contract or completion of
your album (though I’ve gone as long as nine to twelve months). If the time
period is measured from completion of your album, be sure you have an
outside date—otherwise, if the company never records you, the date will never
arrive. For example, you might require a company to make an agreement
within six months after completion of your album, but in no event later than
twelve months after execution of your deal.
If they don’t use a major distributor, you want to approve who it is. Without
your having this approval, the company can just slap your records on
TuneCore and say they have a distributor. Assuming the independent agrees to
your approval, it will say you must be “reasonable” in saying yes or no, so you
can’t use this clause to get out of the deal when some prettier face dangles more
money in front of you. (You wouldn’t do that, would you?) And by the way,
when I represent the independent, I insist that the artist preapprove all the likely
distributors (which I then list).
Watch out for this one: Suppose your deal with the independent is for two
albums rm, but the distributor drops the company (and you) after one album.
How do you make sure the company doesn’t hold you for the second album?
Historically, part of your protection was a guaranteed release—if they didn’t
put your album out, you could terminate the deal (see page 117). But
nowadays, since that just means throwing your recordings online, it’s no
protection at all. Also, as you’ll remember from page 110, companies don’t

even have to make a record to hang on to your contract. And if they don’t
record any product, the guaranteed release never comes into play. Knowing
this, various sleazeballs in our business have sunk their teeth into an artist and
not let go if they smelled that somebody might pay them for the privilege.
The way to cover yourself is to say that the independent has six to twelve
months after a distribution deal lapses within which to get a new deal with an
approved distributor, or else you’re out.
But even if the indie gets a deal with an approved distributor, there’s no
guarantee they’ll put any marketing push into your records. So in the end, just
as if you had a deal directly with a major label, it will come down to whether
your music excites them.

11
Producer and Mixer Deals

WHAT’S A PRODUCER?
Traditionally, a record producer combines the roles of director and producer in
the motion picture eld. He or she is responsible for bringing the creative
product into tangible form (a recording), which means (a) being responsible for
maximizing the creative process ( nding and selecting songs, deciding on
arrangements, getting the right vocal sound, etc.) and (b) administering the
whole project, such as booking studios, hiring musicians, staying within a
budget, ling union reports, etc. (The mechanical aspects of administration—
actually calling the musicians, doing the paperwork, etc.—are often handled by
a production coordinator, whose life purpose is to make things happen.)
In the pop/EDM/hip-hop world, there are a number of producers who
produce only tracks, meaning everything except the vocals. The tracks can be
“made to order” for a speci c artist, or often these folks produce tracks without
any particular artist in mind, then sell them to the highest bidder. It’s also
common for an artist to record a song with a producer, decide not to use it, and
then let the producer remove the artist’s vocal and use the track for someone
else.
If you just get a track from the producer, you will also need a vocal
producer, who (not surprisingly) produces the vocals to nish the track. Sort of
like building a burrito at Chipotle.

The History of Producers
As we discussed earlier, artists in the 1950s were mostly people who just showed
up to sing, then left to “do lunch.” My friend, the late Snu Garrett, one of the
most important producers of the fties and sixties, considered it burdensome if
it took him more than ve days to record an album (and the artist wasn’t even
there for the whole time). Using this technique, Snu produced records for
Cher, Sonny and Cher, Gary Lewis and the Playboys, Bobby Vee, Del Shannon,
and a host of other successes, including such strange choices as Telly Savalas and
Walter Brennan.
Snu started out (as did all the early producers) as an A&R man (the letters
stand for Artists and Repertoire). A&R men (in those days there were no
A&R “persons”) were executives of record companies whose job was to nd,
sign, and guide talent, match songs to singers, and run recording sessions (in
other words, doing almost exactly what producers do today). As we discussed
earlier, A&R executives still exist, and indeed are among the most important
industry people. They’re responsible for nding and developing talent, as well
as nding songs, matching producers and artists, and generally overseeing
projects. But today most of them don’t actually produce the recordings
(although many of the better ones come pretty close to producing).
Anyway, Snu worked for Liberty Records, which was then run by its
founder and chief executive, Simon Waronker (the father of former Warner
Records and DreamWorks Records president Lenny Waronker); its president,
Alvin Bennett; and its chief recording engineer, Theodore Keep. (Do the rst
names of these gentlemen sound familiar? Do they remind you of a recording
artist on Liberty? See page 136 for the answer if you can’t guess.) Snu , who
was one of the smartest businesspeople I ever met, but hid behind this country
cornpone, gured out early on that he was making millions of dollars for
Liberty while getting a generous but small salary in comparison to what he was
generating. So he summoned up all his courage and asked Alvin for a royalty of
one cent per record.
Alvin was not pleased.

The radical idea that a person instrumental in creating product could get a
royalty? I’m guessing words like “outrageous” and “treason” got thrown
around between the four-letter daggers. Snu almost got red for this request,
but he stood his ground and was so valuable to Liberty that he won the point.
And started a trend that is the reason today’s producers get royalties on records.

ROYALTIES
Producers get a U.S. royalty in the range of 3% to 4%. Some producers, who
become “superstars” in their own right by producing hugely successful records,
can get 5% or (very rarely) 6%. (If there are two producers, each generally gets
half, though vocal producers normally max out at 1%, or may just get a at fee.)
However, there are some major distinctions between artists’ and producers’
royalties, and some ne points that will bite you in the butt if you don’t know
about them.
Sometimes artists or labels hire a producer to executive produce (EP) an
album and do all the above for the project ( nding talent, songs, etc.). In this
case, they get a royalty in the range of 1% to 2%, sometimes more for superstar
producers who are really putting the whole project together. This is in addition
to what you pay your actual producers.

“Record One” Royalties
Interestingly, for whatever historical reasons, producers’ royalties are computed
more favorably than artists’ royalties. Speci cally, with success, producers are
paid for all records exploited, meaning recording costs are not charged against
their royalties. (As you know, recording costs are always charged against artists’
royalties.) These are called record one royalties, because they’re paid from the
rst record (“record one”) that the company exploits. Producers, of course, have
to recoup the advances they put in their pocket, but if you think of those
advances as a prepayment of royalties, it’s the same as getting a royalty on all
records. (Actually, some superstar producers are paid from record one and

don’t even have to recoup all of their up-front money, as we’ll discuss in a
minute.)
Producers’ royalties are paid retroactive to record one after recoupment of
recording costs at the net artist rate. What this means in English is that (a)
recording costs are recouped at the artist’s net rate (the all-in artist rate after
deducting all third-party royalties, which generally means the royalty for the
producer, any mixers, samples, etc.); (b) until recording costs are recouped, the
producer gets no royalties at all (just like an artist); but (c) once recording costs
are recouped, the producer gets paid on all monies earned, including those
used to recoup recording costs. In other words, once recording costs are
recouped, the producer is paid on all monies earned prior to that point (which
we call record one from the days when it meant the rst record sold). This
payment is retroactive because the company “goes back” and pays on
exploitations previously made that didn’t bear royalties at the time of
exploitation (because they were being used to recoup costs).
The retroactive concept is easier to understand with numbers. Suppose an
artist’s “all-in” royalty (artist and producer combined) is 12%, and the
producer’s royalty is 2%. (These numbers bear no relationship to reality but
make for easy math.) That makes the “net” royalty 10% (the 12% all-in rate less
the 2% producer royalty). Here’s what happens when the album generates $1
million for the record company, meaning the artist earns $100,000 (the 10% net
royalty multiplied times $1 million):
Producer’s Recording Cost Recoupment
Computation
Producer’s Royalty Account
Company Income
$1,000,000 Company Income
“Net” Royalty
× 10% Producer Royalty
Less: Recording Costs
–$100,000
–$120,000
DEFICIT
– $20,000 NET PAYABLE

$1,000,000
×0

$0

Since the artist’s 10% net royalty equals only $100,000, which is short of the
$120,000 recording costs, the album’s recording costs are unrecouped and
therefore the producer doesn’t get any royalties. That’s why the producer
royalty is zero in the above example.

Now let’s assume the company generates $1.2 million, which means the
artist earns a total of $120,000 at the 10% net rate. At this point, the $120,000
of recording costs are recouped, and the producer is paid on all the money
earned (i.e., retroactively to the rst dollar, which, as noted, we call record one).
Thus, because the producer has a 2% royalty, he or she gets 2% of $1.2 million,
or $24,000:
Producer’s Recording Cost Recoupment
Computation
Producer’s Royalty Account
Company Income
$1,200,000 Company Income
“Net” Royalty
× 10% Producer Royalty
Less: Recording Costs
–$120,000
–$120,000
NET PAYABLE
$0 NET PAYABLE

$1,200,000
× 2%

$24,000

Did you notice that the producer is owed money, but the artist isn’t? Stick
around… (It’s on page 131 if you can’t wait, but don’t forget to come back.)
Let’s go a little deeper into the retroactive formula. If the producer didn’t
produce the entire album (and it’s extremely rare these days for one producer to
do everything), which recording costs have to be recouped before the producer
gets the retroactive money? That would seem like a “duh” question. It’s the
costs of the recordings they produced. Right? Well, maybe not…
If you need to recoup recording costs on, say, your two tracks on the album,
you get paid when the artist’s net royalties on those two tracks recoup those
costs. But many producers want to get paid when all the album recording costs
(meaning the costs of their records plus the recordings they didn’t produce) are
recouped from the artist’s net royalties on the entire album (meaning the
royalty on all tracks combined). Why would they want this? Because, if your
track is relatively expensive compared to the other tracks on the album, it will
take longer to recoup from just your track’s royalties than it will to recoup all
album costs from the full album royalty.
This is easier to see with numbers. For example, say there are ten tracks on
the album and you have two tracks that cost $50,000 each (making up
numbers). If the other eight tracks cost $25,000 each, you have total recording
costs of $300,000—$50,000 for each of your two tracks ($100,000), plus eight

tracks at $25,0000 ($200,000). Dividing $300,000 by ten tracks equals $30,000
per track, which means you only have to recover $30,000 (rather than $50,000)
to get paid your retroactive royalty.
In addition, your track may not be a single, which means it’ll be even harder
for you to recoup. But if you use all the album royalties to recoup, you’ll get the
bene t of those bigger tracks recouping your costs.
Of course, if you have the big hits on the album, and/or the cheaper tracks, it
will take longer to recoup under this formula.
Eventually, under either formula, if the album is successful enough to
recoup, you’ll end up in the same place (getting paid retroactive to record one).

ADVANCES
Producers, like artists, also get advances. These advances fall into two categories.
In one corner, weighing in at more than three hundred pounds, you’ve got the
hip-hop producers and a handful of superstar pop producers. These folks are
often considered as important as (or in some cases more important than) the
artist—just adding their name to a track can mean hundreds of millions of
streams. And in the other corner, we’ve got rock producers and everybody else.
For rock/everybody else, the range of advances is:
1. New Producers:
Anywhere from zero to $7,500 per recording. If the producer is doing
an entire album, advances are anywhere from zero to about $30,000 per
album.
2. Midlevel:
$10,000 to $15,000 per recording, or about $30,000 to $50,000 for the
entire album.
3. Superstar:
Up to $25,000 per track, and about $150,000 to $200,000 for the whole
album.
4. Executive Producers (see page 125 for what an executive producer is):

Executive producer advances are in the range of $10,000 per recording,
or sometimes an overall advance in the range of $100,000 for a whole
album. Note this is in addition to what you pay your actual producers.
For urban/pop:
1. New Producers:
Anywhere from zero to $10,000 per recording.
2. Midlevel:
$20,000 to $30,000 per recording.
3. Superstar:
$50,000 to $80,000 per recording, and up.
For urban/pop, these amounts are generally recording funds, meaning they
include recording costs (just like the artist funds we discussed on page 98). The
important issue with funds is to allocate how much is treated as recording costs,
and how much is considered the producer’s advance. The higher the recording
costs, the worse for the artist—remember, from page 127, only the advance is
charged against producer royalties, because the royalties are payable from record
one after recoupment of the recording costs. Not surprisingly, producers want
more allocated to recording costs, and artists want more allocated to advances.
By the way, in making this allocation, the actual recording costs have
virtually nothing to do with the discussion (in fact, many of these producers
own their own studios, so the actual costs are minimal). The negotiation is
really about how much gets charged to the producer’s royalties. Today, 50% is
pretty much the norm, so if you want more than that to be recoupable, you
should say so when you start negotiating the producer’s deal.
Some superstar producers push this even further and get a totally
nonrecoupable fee. The fee includes the cost of the producer’s studio time and
personnel, but if there are recording costs outside their studio and personnel,
those are on top.

OTHER ROYALTY COMPUTATIONS

Except for the record one aspect we discussed on page 125, producers’ royalties
are generally calculated the same way as the artists’ (although audiovisual
royalties are di erent, as noted in the next section). For example, if an artist gets
75% of his or her U.S. rate in England, the producer will get 75% of his or her
U.S. producer rate in England. We’ll get into the details of how artist royalties
are calculated in the next chapter.
There are situations where the artist gets license income rather than a royalty
(as we’ll discuss on page 152). This is for things like a license to use your
recording in a motion picture. In that case, the label licenses your recording to
the lm company for a set dollar amount. Artists usually get 50% of the
company’s net receipts from this license income, and the producer gets a prorata share of those monies, based on the ratio that the producer’s royalty bears to
the all-in rate. For example, if the artist’s all-in rate is 12% and the producer gets
3%, the producer would get three-twelfths (one-fourth, or 25%) of the artist’s
receipts. This percentage is often referred to in contracts as the fraction. For
example, if a record company gets $20,000 to use an artist’s recording in a lm,
it puts 50% ($10,000) into the artist’s account. In our example, the fraction is
three-twelfths (meaning 25%), so the producer gets 25% of the artist’s $10,000
($2,500).
As we said earlier, the producer’s royalties are calculated the same way as the
artist’s. But what happens if the artist doesn’t have a royalty deal with their
label? For example, the artist might get a share of pro ts (rather than a royalty),
or the artist might distribute their records through a distributor who takes a
percentage and pays everything else to the artist. (We’ll discuss how those deals
work for the artist later.) Because there’s no royalty calculation for the artist, the
producer can’t get the same calculation. So what happens?
The answer is one of two choices:
1. Similar to what we just discussed for licensing income, the producer gets
a percentage of the artist’s pro ts. However, since there is no artist
royalty for the denominator of the formula, it’s a negotiated percentage.
For example, the artist and producer might calculate their formula as if
the artist had a 20% royalty (a commonly used number). So if the

producer has a 4% royalty, the producer would get 25% (4/20ths) of the
artist’s pro ts.

OR
2. The producer gets a deemed or imputed royalty, meaning the artist
negotiates the producer’s royalty provisions like any other royalty deal,
and those are used to calculate the producer’s money. In other words,
the producer gets a royalty that’s computed and paid on the basis of the
deemed provisions, totally independent of how the artist is paid.
To gure out which method is best for you, talk to your lawyer, business
manager, or colon cleanser.

Audiovisual Royalties
For audiovisual exploitations (mainly streaming videos these days), producers
generally get half of their otherwise applicable rate. The theory is that the
recording is only half of the product (the video portion is the other half). For
example, if the producer had a 3% royalty and YouTube streams the video, the
producer would get 1.5% of the revenue. Also, for videos, the payment isn’t
retroactive to record one, but rather prospectively after recoupment of video
costs.

WHO HIRES THE PRODUCER?
At one time, record companies routinely hired the producers. That was in the
days when one producer did an entire album (a concept that has almost
vanished, since most albums today have multiple producers—other than a few
areas like rock, country, and oompah alpine bands). As it became common to
have four, ve, or more producers per album, the companies realized their inhouse lawyers were spending so much time negotiating producer deals that it
was clogging up their system. So they hit on the brilliant idea that the artist
should hire the producer, which has not only shifted the paperwork burden to

the artist, but has also shifted the nancial burden to them. Let’s analyze the
issues separately.

Who Actually Hires (Contracts with) the
Producer?
When the artist hires the producer, the artist gets a direct contractual
relationship with them, the producer is answerable to the artist, and the artist
has full control of deciding the terms of the producer’s deal. That’s the good
news if you’re an artist. And now for the hidden message: You bear the legal fees
for negotiating the producer deals, along with mixers, guest artists, and anyone
else who contributes, as well as the responsibility for documenting these deals
and delivering the contracts to the label so they can release your record.
But wait. There’s more bad news.

Who Pays the Producer?
As we discussed, in an all-in deal, you’re responsible for the producer’s royalties,
regardless of who actually signs the contract with him or her. This is a much
more serious issue than it may look at rst glance. As we discussed on page 126
the producer may be entitled to royalties before you’re recouped under your
deal with the record company. In other words, you owe money to the producer
at a time when the record company doesn’t owe you anything. Which means
you could have to write a check to the producer from your own pocket. Which
majorly sucks.
And the situation can get much worse. Continuing with the same
assumptions we used previously, let’s assume the artist got a $100,000 advance
on top of the $120,000 in recording costs. That means the artist won’t get any
money until both the $120,000 in recording costs and the $100,000 advance
are recouped. Meanwhile, the producer (who didn’t share in the $100,000
advance) is owed royalties. For example, if the company earns $2 million, check
out this Parade of Horribles:
Artist’s Account

Producer’s Account

Company Income
“Net” Royalty
Less: Recording Costs
Less Artist Advance
DEFICIT

$2,000,000
× 10%
–$200,000
–$120,000
–$100,000
–20,000

Company Income
Royalty

NET PAYABLE

$2,000,000
× 2%
$40,000

$40,000

As you can see, you’re $20,000 unrecouped (which means you have no
money coming in for a while), but you owe $40,000 to the producer. If that
$40,000 number doesn’t impress you, try adding a zero to make it $400,000.
Do I have your attention?
This is one of the times when success can kill you, because the more streams
you have, the deeper in the hole you go. (In a sense, I’m misleading you. First of
all, at some level of success the artist will recoup and earn enough royalties to
pay o the producer. Secondly, part of the reason the artist isn’t getting royalties
is an advance, which is in his or her pocket. So if you think of advances as
prepaid royalties, the artist has already gotten these royalties and has to pay a
part of them to the producer. However, unless you’re very di erent from the
artists I know, you won’t be setting money aside for your producer. Also, much
of this problem is caused by the fact that recording costs haven’t been recouped,
which is not money sitting in your bank account. You can’t put those monies
aside to cover the producer even if you want to.)
Think that’s the worst of it? Nah, we’re just getting warmed up. Here’s how
the above example can get truly miserable:
Suppose the deal we just discussed was the artist’s rst album, and it earned
only $300,000 for the company, meaning $30,000 for the artist. This means the
album didn’t recoup its $120,000 of recording costs, and the producer didn’t
recoup his or her advance. So far, the artist doesn’t owe the producer anything,
and everything is ne (from the point of view of our example, that is—the
artist’s career is of course in the toilet). When it comes time to do a second
album, the artist ditches this turkey and hires a new producer. Let’s assume the
second album also costs $120,000, and let’s assume the artist’s recording fund is
$200,000 for both the rst and second albums, so that the artist pockets $80,000
(the di erence between the fund and the $120,000 recording costs) on each

album. Also, assume the second album grosses $3 million, and earns $300,000
for the artist. That means the artist has recouped the recording costs of the
second album, and the producer of album number 2 is entitled to retroactive
royalties. This means he or she is owed $60,000 (2% of $3 million).
Now let’s look at how the accounts stack up. First, the artist’s account with
the record company:

Album 1

Album 2

TOTAL

Artist’s Account with Record Company
Charges Against
Due Artist (or
Royalty Earnings
Royalties
Deﬁcit)
+$30,000
–$200,000
–$170,000
($120,000 recording
costs and $80,000
advance)
+$300,000
–$200,000
+$100,000
($120,000 recording
costs and $80,000
advance)
+$330,000
–$400,000
–$70,000
ROYALTIES

CHARGES

DEFICIT

Now here’s the computation of album number 2’s producer royalties
(album number 1’s producer isn’t owed any royalties):

Album 2

Album Number 2 Producer’s Account with Artist
Charges Against Due Artist (or
Royalty Earnings
Royalties
Deﬁcit)
+$60,000
+$60,000
PAYABLE

As you can see from the above, the producer of album number 2 is owed
$60,000, but the artist is unrecouped by $70,000. If you add a few more
unsuccessful albums prior to the big hit, or add a few zeros after these dollar
amounts, the artist is nearing 10 on the Richter scale. And the producer ain’t
gonna be much happier when he or she doesn’t get paid—instead of having a
nice solid record company to send out the producer’s royalty checks, he or she
now has to chase the artist, who was last seen partying in Ibiza.

So what happens in real life? Any producer who has the slightest idea what
they’re doing will insist on the record company paying his or her royalties. Any
artist who has the slightest idea what they’re doing will insist on the record
company paying the producer’s royalties. Any record company that knows what
it’s doing will grumble but ultimately do this. Sort of…
The reality is that producers simply won’t produce an artist unless the record
company gets into the mix, so you can almost always get the record company to
pay the producer when you’re unrecouped. (It’s easy to get them to pay when
you’re recouped; they just take it out of your money.) Unless you’re a mega
star, they won’t contractually agree to pay a producer while you’re unrecouped.
However, they will accept a letter of direction (known to its friends as an
L.O.D.), which is a letter from the artist to the company that takes way too
much legalese to say, “Please pay my producer (and deduct it from me).” The
letter will attach a royalty schedule that the producer has agreed to accept, so
that the company knows how much to pay them. If you’re a producer, be sure
all your deals require the artist to send the company such a letter of direction;
without it, you won’t get paid.
When the company agrees to pay under a letter of direction, they will say
that they’re doing it only as an “accommodation,” meaning it’s because they
love you, not because they have to. In other words, the company has no legal
obligation to pay the producer, and the producer has no legal right to sue the
company if they don’t get paid. The producer can only sue the artist who signed
their deal. Neither producers nor artists love this, but it’s the best we can do, so
they all agree to take it.
Before a record company agrees to pay a producer, however, they’ll insist on
approving the producer’s deal. That’s to make sure the amount the company
has to pay while you’re unrecouped can’t get out of hand. They want to keep
the producer’s royalty low (not a surprise), but interestingly they want to keep
the producer’s advance high. Can you gure out why they want a higher
producer advance? (See the answer at the end of the chapter if you can’t guess.)
Whatever payments the company makes are treated as additional advances
under your deal. In our example, this means the company would pay the
producer $60,000 and you would then be $130,000 in the red (the original

$70,000 plus the $60,000 paid to the producer). That makes you further
unrecouped, but it’s vastly superior to taking the money from your own pocket
(few things aren’t).

SoundExchange Monies
If you’re a producer, you want a share of SoundExchange monies, which means
nothing to you, because I haven’t told you what SoundExchange is. As we’ll see
later (on page 139), artists get paid for digital transmissions of recordings that
are not interactive (meaning not on-demand), such as Sirius XM, Pandora, and
the like. The artists’ monies for these uses are collected by an out t called
SoundExchange (more about them on page 328).
While we’ll talk about SoundExchange speci cs down the road, the thing to
understand now is that producers aren’t entitled to SoundExchange monies
unless the artist tells SoundExchange to pay them. So if you’re a producer, it’s
important that your deal with the artist requires them to send SoundExchange a
letter of direction (similar to what I described above for the labels) telling them
to slide some dough your way.
Also, if there are any other featured artists on the recording, SoundExchange
will be paying those artists directly, so you also need a letter of direction from
these other artists asking SoundExchange to pay you as a producer from the
other artist’s share of SoundExchange. As a producer, you don’t have a contract
with the other featured artists (you only have a deal with the primary artist who
is hiring you), so in your deal with the primary artist you need to require them
to submit letters of direction on behalf of any other featured artists. Try to also
get a clause that says the primary artist has to pay your SoundExchange monies
until they get the other featured artists to submit letters to SoundExchange.
This clause isn’t always gettable.
The producer’s share of SoundExchange monies is the same percentage of
the artist’s money that the producer gets for motion picture licenses; in other
words, it’s “the fraction” multiplied times the artist’s SoundExchange money
(see page 129 for what “the fraction” means). For example, if the producer has a

3% royalty and the artist has 12%, the producer gets 3⁄12, or 25% of the artist’s
SoundExchange monies.
Recently, the Music Modernization Act adopted some protections for
producers, in a section cleverly named AMP, meaning Allocation for Music
Producers. Those Washington guys are such a barrel of punsters…
Basically, the AMP provision cleans up procedural stu and adds some
goodies for old-timers: If you were a producer, mixer, or sound engineer on a
sound recording made before November 1, 1995, and you don’t have a letter of
direction from the artist, you can get 2% of the SoundExchange monies if you
can’t nd the artist. If this is relevant to you, check out Title III of the Music
Modernization Act, which you can nd online. If it’s not, don’t bother.

MIXERS
Closely akin to producers are mixers, whose work we brie y discussed on page
97. Basically, these folks take the multitracks, throw them in a blender, and pour
out a mystical potion of sublime music. Mixers create a mix for the original
release of a record, and they also do remixes for later versions.
Great mixers can make a huge di erence in the success of a record, so they’re
paid handsomely. Mixers generally get in the range of $3,000 to $5,000 per
track, though top pop mixers can get $7,500 to $12,500 or more. Usually this is
a one-time payment, but mixers with clout can get a royalty as well. If there are
royalties, they’re usually around 1%, paid exactly like a producer royalty
(retroactive to record one after recoupment of recording costs at the net rate).
The per-track money we just discussed (e.g., the $3,000 for mixing) is often a
fee, meaning it’s not recoupable from royalties (fee, in industry parlance, means
nonrecoupable; as opposed to an advance, which is recoupable). For the higherpaid folks, 50% of their up-front money is usually recoupable.
When we enter the hip-hop world of mixers, we walk through the looking
glass. The top hip-hop mixers can get $30,000 to $50,000 per remix, and
sometimes more. When they also get royalties (and a lot of them do), it can be
more than 1% (as high as 2%). As with pop producers, because they’re so highly
paid, half their money is usually treated as an advance (the other half is

nonrecoupable). However, at these levels, it’s hard to earn enough royalties to
ever recoup, especially since a lot of remixing is done only for speci c genres
(like a dance remix of a pop song), which means the income is limited.
Answer to question on page 124:
The Chipmunks.
Answer to question on page 134:
Record companies want you to pay the producer a higher advance so that the
producer isn’t owed royalties until as late as possible, after which you’ve
recouped more of your de cit.
If you’re on the Fast Track, go to Part III (Chapter 15) on page 215. Everyone else,
read on…

12
Advanced Royalty Computations

ROYALTIES FOR THE UNITED STATES
We’ll start rst with United States royalties, because, if you’re signing to a U.S.
company, all other royalties are based on (i.e., a reduced percentage of) the rate
for the United States. And we’ll start with royalties, as most contracts are
written that way unless you’ve got heavy heat and can get a pro t share. We’ll
hit how pro t shares work on page 162.
The royalties we discussed in Chapters 7 and 9 are for exploitations of
recordings in the United States (meaning streaming, downloads, CDs, and
vinyl). For downloads, CDs, and vinyl, those royalties only apply to sales at full
price (sometimes called top-line price), and there are reduced royalties for
other prices, as you’ll see in a minute. (This concept is of course irrelevant to
streaming.) Your U.S. rate for full-price exploitations is called, in most
contracts, a base rate, or basic rate.
By the way, in most contracts, full price means 80% or more of the
company’s highest wholesale price for the format involved (you’ll see why they
use 80% in a minute). So if a CD wholesales for $8, full price means anything
priced at $6.40 or more.
Let’s assume you have a base rate of 10%, to make the math easier for the
next topic, which happens to be…

FOREIGN ROYALTIES

Even though we Americans think the world stops at our borders, it turns out
that people on the rest of the planet also like music. But if you’re a U.S.-based
artist, you’ll get less money in those other places. If it makes you feel any better,
UK artists signed to a UK company get less in the United States.
Feeling better?
As streaming takes over, at least one record company now makes deals at the
same rate for worldwide streaming, physical, and downloads (meaning no
foreign deductions). But other than this outlier, unless you are the most super
of superstars, you’re going to get a smaller royalty for exploitations outside our
border wall, certainly for physical product and possibly downloads. The
reduction varies widely from company to company, and artist to artist, but as a
broad rule, companies give a higher rate in “major” territories, and in territories
where they have an ownership interest in the foreign distributor (today the
majors all have worldwide operations). Conversely, they give a lower royalty in
“minor” territories and in territories where they’re only licensing their product
to a wholly independent third party (licensing means they give someone else
the right to exploit the recordings and get a royalty from those folks).
Here’s the most common pattern:

Canada
Canada is 90% of the United States rate with most companies, although some
want 85%, and some still treat it like any other “major” foreign territory (see the
next paragraph). Using our example of a 10% U.S. basic rate, a 90% rate means
you’d get 9% for normal retail sales in Canada.

Major Territories
There are a number of markets in which American product sells particularly
well, and these are known as the “major” territories. They of course vary from
artist to artist, but in general they are (in no particular order): United Kingdom,
Australia, Italy, Japan, Holland, Germany, and France.

The remaining European Union countries (Western Europe) and
Scandinavia can be treated as “majors” if you have some clout.
The royalty for major territories varies for the same reasons set forth above
(ownership versus licensing, artist clout), but it’s generally 70% to 75% of the
U.S. basic rate, or 7% to 7.5% in our example. With clout, you can get this up to
80%, and sometimes a bit higher for the United Kingdom (like 85%).
And in all these places, you should push for a higher royalty on streaming.

R.O.W.
R.O.W. stands for rest of world and means the grab bag of countries left over,
which I’ll leave to you and Google Maps to gure out. The royalties for these
territories generally run around 50% to 66.66% of the U.S. basic rate, or 5% to
6.66% under our assumption. If you have bargaining power, you can
sometimes edge this up a bit, to 70% or so. Again, try to do better on streaming.
While those are the general rules, if you’re an artist with a huge following in
any particular territory, you can usually negotiate a better royalty for that
country. Also, as I said earlier, there is one major label that pays the same royalty
worldwide, without any deductions. Let’s encourage the others to follow them.

ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSIONS
To record companies, every delivery of music that isn’t physical is an electronic
transmission. As you’d expect, this means streaming and downloads, but it
includes much, much more. Typical contract language de nes electronic
transmissions as something like this: “Any transmission or delivery to a
consumer, whether audio or audiovisual, and/or with other data, by any means
now known or hereafter discovered, whether on demand or not, and whether
or not a charge is made for the transmission or delivery.”
So… can you tell what all it picks up besides audio streaming and downloads?
Certainly YouTube, and any new delivery services that are later invented.
But did you notice it also sweeps in radio, TV, and motion pictures (at least

when they’re streamed or broadcast)? More about that later.
Before we hit the royalties for electronic transmissions, let me give you:

The Passman Theory of Technology Cycles
There are predictable patterns that take place every time a new technology hits
the music industry. It goes something like this:
1. Because the technology is so new, no one (including the record
companies) understands its economics. Also, when it’s rst introduced,
the thing is usually expensive to create and there are very few consumers
interested and/or able to a ord it. For example, when digital started, the
companies had to take all their analog music and turn it into digital, as
well as add metadata (see page 72 for what that is) and set up systems to
keep track of the billions of digital uses. All this while the digital
exploitations earned zippo.
2. The result is a grace period during which royalties on these newbies are
not particularly favorable to the artist. This is to give the technology a
chance to get o the ground, and to help the record company justify the
nancial risk of going into it.
3. Invariably, this grace period goes on far beyond its economic life, during
which time the companies make disproportionate pro ts.
4. As artist deals expire or are renegotiated, the rates go up.
5. Finally, an industry pattern develops and royalty rates stabilize.
Okay, that’s the opening act. Time for the headliner.

ON-DEMAND STREAMING
On-demand streaming, also called interactive streaming, means you can
listen to any songs in a digital service provider’s database, any time you like, and
you can pause, skip, rewind, and create playlists. Examples are Spotify, Apple

Music, YouTube, Amazon Music, and SoundCloud. This is by far the biggest
segment of the recorded music business, and it’s still growing.
For these uses, you get your royalty rate applied against the record company’s
receipts from the DSP, so if they get $10,000 and you have a 10% royalty, you
get $1,000.
On these services, you’re not allowed to permanently download; just listen.
Some of the services let you download and listen o ine, but the download goes
away if you stop paying for your subscription. This is called a tethered
download, which we’ll discuss in a minute.
As of this writing, Spotify, SoundCloud, and YouTube are the only major
companies that o er on-demand streams for free (if you don’t mind listening to
annoying ads). Pandora o ers a free service, but it’s not interactive. As we’ll
discuss in a minute, there is pressure on these services to move their customers
to a subscription basis (“subscription” meaning the users have to pay a monthly
fee to get the music). Services like Apple Music that are subscription-only
(meaning they have no free advertiser-supported service along with the
subscription) sometimes o er a free introductory period to try it out, but it’s
for a limited time. Spotify and YouTube, which o er both free and
subscription, are currently unlimited, but Spotify’s free mobile service, which is
where the majority of its users are, is not fully on demand. YouTube, however,
is fully interactive for mobile.

May I See Your ARPU?
An important aspect of streaming is something called ARPU (pronounced “RPoo”). That may sound like a character on The Simpsons, but it means Average
Rate Per User. In other words, what’s the average amount of money that the
streaming service gets from each user? For Apple Music, that’s easy. Every user
pays a subscription fee (other than for a thirty-day free trial period), so if the
average subscription fee is $7 per month (the headline $10 per month is reduced
by student and family discounts), then Apple Music’s ARPU is $7.
However, the ARPU for Spotify’s and other DSPs (digital service providers)
is much lower. Can you gure out why?

Remember that Spotify o ers a free ad-supported service, then hopes you’ll
pay a subscription fee to lose the ads. At the time of this writing, Spotify’s free
users are a bit more than half the total subscribers.
The ad-supported free users bring in way less money than paid subscribers.
Why? Over-the-air radio has about fourteen to sixteen minutes per hour of
advertising, while Spotify has much less. That means: (a) Spotify ads can’t
generate as much money (there’s not as much time sold); (b) their rates are
cheaper than over-the-air ads; and (c) because there’s less advertising time, there
aren’t enough ads to annoy people into paying a subscription fee.
Accordingly, the ARPU is majorly diluted by the freebie users. In other
words, for every $7 per month from a Spotify subscriber, there’s more than one
ad-supported subscriber who brings in far less money. Which means the average
earnings per stream come out to a much smaller number than they would on a
pure subscription service (like Apple Music).
This is easier to see with an example (though I’m making up the numbers).
Assume Spotify has one paid subscriber and free user (that’s close to the ratio
that now exists, though there are a few more freebies). Also assume (still making
up numbers) that the total ad sales for the free user is $2 per subscriber, and that
Spotify gets $7 from the paid subscriber. If you add those together ($9) and
divide by the total number of subscribers (two), you get an average rate per user
(ARPU) of $4.50, which is obviously far less than the $7 it gets from the paid
subscriber. And a lot lower than Apple Music, where they get a full
subscription fee from every user.
So, now you understand why the music biz is pressuring Spotify to push its
users away from free and into paid subscriptions. Spotify argues that the free
service is necessary to get people into the “funnel” that leads them to paid
subscriptions, which is true to some degree, but I understand a lot of people
never convert to subscription. This game is still in progress, so stay tuned.
But wait… there’s more! As we discussed, your music gets a share of the
DSP’s revenues, allocated on the basis of how many streams you have compared
to all the other music streamed that month. Key word in the prior sentence:
music. The rates negotiated by the labels are based on music revenue. This
means some streams are allocated to non-music and come out of the mix.

Examples are spoken word programs (like comedians’) and just sounds
(running streams, ocean, sheet metal factory—just kidding about the last one,
but I suppose you could play it while you’re on the phone telling your
signi cant other that you’re tied up at work…). This allocation to non-music is
called dilution, because it dilutes how much money goes to the music side and
reduces the music ARPU. For this reason, the labels are starting to negotiate a
provision in deals with the DSPs that limits how much their music revenue can
be diluted (called a dilution cap).
Podcasts are generally treated as a separate category, meaning their ad
revenue is excluded from the gross, and their play time is excluded from the
music pool even if they contain music.
There are other issues around dilution as well. For example, some music is
commissioned by the DSP (meaning they ask someone to create it) and paid at a
lower streaming rate. Examples would be spa music and the like, which are
somewhat protected by a dilution cap. Recently, Universal Music has publicly
said they’re concerned about the fact that their major artists draw in subscribers,
but the DSPs then use algorithms to steer users to music that costs them less
money, such as the commissioned works we just discussed. And another
concern is that there are thirty-one-second clips (just over the thirty seconds
necessary to count as a stream for allocating the money), and in some cases these
short clips can “barely pass” for music but are also diluting the pool. Indeed,
there have even been causes of fraud where folks put up thirty-one second clips
then have bots listen to them continually, to siphon money away from
legitimate music. The industry is very aware of these problems, and working on
a plan to x this system, but there’s no clear solution at this time
Another potentially big issue in the streaming world is music created by
arti cial intelligence. We’ll talk more about AI on page 340, once you’ve got
some copyright concepts under your belt, but machine-generated music could
also dilute the money allocated to human-created recordings. It’s not much of a
problem as I write this, because there is little AI music on the DSPs, but more is
de nitely coming. AIs can churn out tons of music very quickly, and under
today’s system, every AI music stream reduces what goes to the labels and artists,

who have spent years and sweat building their careers, while the creators get
very little (or nothing if the DSP uses AI to create it).
There’s no clear solution to AI at this time. Possibly, if the DSPs agree, AI
could be segregated from the formula of what’s paid to labels, just as podcasts
are now. However, these tracks will be pure music, and the DSPs may not know
what’s created by AI and what isn’t. Possibly there’s legislation requiring AI to
be identi ed, so it could be segregated, but getting Congress to pay attention to
something like this (much less pass any law these days) is, shall we say,
“challenging”
This area will get a lot of attention over the next few years. Stay tuned for
breaking news.

The Biggest Streamers in the Known Universe
Here’s an even bigger problem than DSP dilution:
YouTube and TikTok deliver more music than all the other services
combined, including the pirate sites. While YouTube has a premium service
with substantial subscribers, those numbers are far less than its free service. And
TikTok uses a massive amount of music (in short clips) that are free, though not
so interactive.
In the prior section, you saw how Spotify’s free, ad-supported service
substantially reduces Spotify’s ARPU. This problem is on steroids when it
comes to YouTube, and it’s even worse on TikTok. First, as we discussed,
YouTube free has a lower revenue base because ads generate far less than
subscription money. Second, YouTube is the only service that o ers consumers
a free, unlimited, fully interactive service on mobile (which is where almost all
the users are). And third, TikTok pays way less than YouTube because, I’m told,
their licenses (so far) are only at fees, not shares of revenue. In fact, they don’t
directly monetize music, so they say, “We don’t get money speci cally for
music, so here’s a at fee and you guys sort it out.” More about this later.
All this should improve over time; take a look back at my theory of
technology cycles and you’ll see this is part of the pattern. But I suspect it will
take longer than we would like (and less time than TikTok would like).

Streaming Royalty Calculations
So what’s all this mean to you as an artist? As we discussed, your royalty rate is
applied to what the company gets. So now it’s time for Toto to pull back the
curtain and let you see the Wizard. Well, mostly pull it back; the deals aren’t
actually public. But I’ll show you the outline of his backside.
Essentially, the streaming services (remember they’re called DSPs, meaning
Digital Service Providers) pay a portion of their income to the record labels.
As I said, the percentages aren’t public, but I understand they’re in the mid 50%
range. For our discussion, I’m going to refer to the percentage of income that
the DSP pays to the record companies as the “Record Company’s Percentage.”
That’s not an industry term, I just made it up because it seems like a reasonable
way to refer to a vague percentage. Cool? (Not that I’m going to change it even
if you don’t think it’s cool…)
As we discussed a while back, the Record Company’s Percentage is applied to
the DSP’s total subscription fees and advertising revenue each month, then prorated for each recording based on the number of streams that month. In other
words, the DSP computes your company’s percentage of the month’s total
streams, multiplies that percentage times their revenue, then pays out the
Record Company’s Percentage of revenue to your company.
When your company gets the dough, they then gure out how many of their
streams were yours, then come up with a fraction determined by comparing
your streams to your record company’s total streams that month. They apply
that fraction to their total revenue, then apply your royalty percentage against
that amount. If this isn’t clear, take a look back at page 82 for a more detailed
example.
For subscription services, most of the record company deals have a persubscriber minimum, also called a per sub minimum, or PSM. That means
the company gets a certain amount for each of the DSP’s subscribers, regardless
of what the DSP actually collects. For example, the deal might say that payment
for the service’s use of recordings can’t be less than the Record Company’s
Percentage of $7 per subscriber. This is to discourage the DSPs from dropping
their prices too low; the record companies are worried that the DSPs might do

this just to build up subscribers. Or to drive tra c to another product, like
Walmart in the old days, when they discounted CDs just to bring in people who
buy vacuum cleaners.
Here’s how it works, using an example of a $10 per-subscriber minimum (to
make the math easier):
Let’s say the Record Company’s Percentage is 50%, meaning the DSP is
obligated to pay 50% of its revenue to the labels. If there is a $10 per-subscriber
minimum (I’m using an easy math number; this is much higher than any real
PSM), the DSP has to pay the record company at least 50% (the Record
Company’s Percentage) of $10 (the PSM), meaning it has to pay out $5 for
every subscriber. This payout is to all of the labels licensing content, so if your
company’s recordings were 30% of the DSP’s total streams in a month, they’d
get 30% of the $5 per-subscriber minimum, meaning $1.50 for each subscriber.
This $1.50 is then pro-rated over all your company’s artists, based on each
recording’s number of plays. For example, if your recordings were streamed
200,000 times in a month, and all of your record company’s recordings were
streamed 1,000,000 times, your streams were 20% of the company’s streams
(200,000/1,000,000). Accordingly, 20% of $1.50 (30¢ per subscriber) would be
allocated to your recordings. You’d then get your royalty rate based on that 30¢.
Meaning, if you had a 10% royalty, you’d get 3¢ per subscriber. (Of course, if
50% of the DSP’s revenue that’s allocated to your company is more than the
PSM, you get the higher amount.)

Per Stream vs. Per User
There’s some controversy over the current system (which I just described) of
allocating money based on the number of streams. It certainly sounds fair on
the surface—if you get more streams, you get more money. But is it?
The argument is whether it would be more equitable to allocate the money
on a per-user basis, as opposed to the current system of allocating per stream.
Let me explain.
I’m a niche artist, with an avid (but small) group of fans. My fans subscribe
to Spotify and listen to my music a lot. Because I’m such a small player, my

streams are a tiny percentage of the total streams, which means I get a very small
piece of the pie under today’s system of allocating per stream.
What if, instead, I got a share of my fans’ speci c subscription money
(meaning the money was allocated per user)? Would that be more fair?
Here’s a very simpli ed example:
Let’s assume there’s a streaming service with just two artists, you and me.
Also assume there are only two subscribers (Billy and Leo), and they each pay
$10 per month, for total subscription fees of $20. And assume the labels get
50% of that money, meaning $10.
In the rst month, Billy listens only to me, and streams my songs 100 times.
In that same month, Leo listens only to you, but streams your songs 900 times.
Under today’s per-stream system, since you had 90% of the listens, the DSP
allocates 90% of the $20 total subscription fees to your label (meaning it gets its
share of $18), and my label is allocated the remaining 10% of the fees (meaning
it gets its share of $2). Since labels’ deals with the streaming service are 50%,
your label would get 50% of the $18, meaning $9, and my label would get the
other $1. Thanks a lot…
However, if the allocation was based on per-user rather than per-stream, the
payout would look very di erent. Since Billy listened only to me, my label
would get 50% of Billy’s subscription money, meaning 50% of $10, or $5
(instead of the $1 under today’s system). And your label would only get $5 of
Leo’s subscription money instead of $9. You’re welcome…
This would of course bene t the smaller artists, and I think it has the ring of
extreme fairness. But it’s a lot more complicated than my example. Subscribers
listen to billions of streams, and I doubt if more than a handful listen to only
one artist, if any. So setting up systems to reallocate like this would be incredibly
complex and expensive.
Recently in France, there was a study of this exact issue. What would it do to
the industry if the DSPs switched to a per-user model? The study was
commissioned by the government-backed Centre National de la Musique
(CNM); I’m not sure who they are, but they sound important. These folks used
data from Spotify and Deezer, and got input from the French PRO

(performing rights organization) and various record companies. Interestingly,
other streaming services didn’t want to get involved.
In February 2021, the CNM issued their report, and here’s the link for the
die-hards, but it’s in French so bonne chance: https://cnm.fr/wpcontent/uploads/2021/01/20200119-CNM-Etude-UCPS-Rapport- nald%C3%A9taill%C3%A9-VF_CONFIDENTIEL.pdf.
For those of you who don’t speak French, like moi, there are some English
reports on their study oating around. From what I could glean, the CNM
didn’t o er an opinion on the merits of switching but rather just laid out the
impact of moving from per-stream to per-user. Their big-picture view (though
remember, this is just France) was that it would reduce the top 10 most
streamed artists by 17.2% for Deezer and 12.5% for Spotify. Not insubstantial
money if you make millions. Those royalties of course go to the lower-ranked
artists. The artists who number 11 through 100 would gain 1.3% on Deezer
and .6% on Spotify, numbers 101 to 1,000 would be up 2.2% Deezer and 1.3%
Spotify, and the remaining bunch would end up with roughly over 5% on
Deezer and in the high 4% on Spotify.
In terms of dough, for the rst half of 2019 (the period they studied), the
CNM said that the top 10 would go down an average of several hundred
thousand Euros per artist (again, this is just for France, so it would be much
bigger money if you expand to other territories). The top 11–100 would go up
about €9,000 per artist, and artists in the 101 to 1,000 range would get an extra
€2,500 per artist. While the percentages might be higher when you get past the
top 1,000, the money drops o radically; according to the study, artists beyond
the top 10,000 would get an extra €10 on average.
Another aspect of the study is that per-user accounting would favor the
secondary genres, like rock, classical, blues, pop rock, jazz, and so forth, to the
detriment of rap and hip-hop. And it would also shift monies away from
current releases to back catalogs.
Also, though I’m not sure if it’s in this study, this system would allocate
more money to artists who are streamed by casual users. That’s because these
users don’t listen to much music, so the rate per stream goes up.

And of course there’s the politics of taking money from the top earners and
pushing it down the ladder.
At the moment, the push for a per-user model doesn’t have much
momentum. But it may come back to life.

Breakage
Another issue around subscription services today is breakage. Which doesn’t
mean a co ee mug you knocked over in a souvenir shop and now have to buy.
It means…
Newer streaming services (and new business models that use music) have to
get licenses to use recordings or they can’t be in business. Unfortunately, a lot of
newer companies have this nasty habit of going broke and sti ng record
companies. So to protect themselves from Sorry It Didn’t Work, I’m Outta
Here, Incorporated, the labels get advances up front against future income
and/or nonrecoupable money. In addition, record labels sometimes get stock in
the new business as part of their license, or they might get the right to buy stock
as part of their license deal. Let’s assume your record company gave a two-year
license to a start-up DSP and got a $1 million advance (I’m making up numbers
for the example—they actually get much more than that). At the end of the two
years, the deal is over, so the DSP can no longer use the music. However, the
record label only earned $600,000 over the two years, meaning $400,000 of the
$1 million was unrecouped. Since this was a nonreturnable advance, the record
company doesn’t have to pay back the $400,000 that wasn’t earned. This
unearned amount (the $400,000 in our example) is called breakage.
“Breakage” also includes nonrecoupable money, which of course is never
earned back, and arguably also includes the stock they got in the company.
So the question is, do artists share in breakage?
The companies argue that it’s not payment for use of your recordings, so
you haven’t earned a piece of it. And it’s true that, unlike royalties, this money
isn’t earned by any speci c recording. But we who represent artists argue that
there wouldn’t be any breakage if there weren’t any artists in the catalog. So all
the artists should share in it.

It’s always worth asking for a piece of breakage in your deal, and many
companies are willing to agree if you have some clout. As a practical matter, all
the majors, and some of the big independents, share breakage with artists even if
they’re not contractually required to (they even share with artists under older
deals that were done before breakage became a big thing). And it’s much less of
an issue these days, as the DSPs are mostly established players. Still, it’s only to
your advantage to require they give you a share of breakage in your deal.
Most (if not all) companies will now also share the pro t they make from
taking stock in a new business that licenses their catalog, though this as well is
almost impossible to get contractually. By “pro t,” I mean they’ll deduct
whatever they paid for the stock and share the excess.
Each of the majors has a di erent way of distributing breakage to their artists.
In general,
1. They rst look at how your recordings performed during the term of the
license to which the breakage relates.
2. Next, they compare the results of your performance to the performance
of all the company’s recordings for that time period.
3. The company then computes your percentage of the total performances
by dividing the result of number 1 above by the result of number 2.
4. Next they multiply that percentage times the breakage money, to
determine the share of money that’s allocated to your recordings.
5. Finally, they multiply the money determined under number 4 above
times your royalty rate, and the result is your share.
This is a little easier to see with numbers. Using a breakage gure of
$400,000, if your recordings streamed 1 million times during the relevant
period, and all the company’s recordings streamed 10 million times, you’d be
allocated 1/10 (10%) of the $400,000 breakage ($40,000). If you have a 15%
royalty, you get 15% of the $40,000 ($6,000).
While that’s generally the formula, there are di erences between the
companies in the computations. For example, some labels allocate based only
on your streams over the service that generated the breakage, while others look

at your streaming numbers on all the services. Some labels also factor in your
overall track record with them, including downloads and physical. Also, some
companies pay your share of breakage as a royalty, meaning it’s used to recoup
your advances and costs, while others pay it to you whether you’re recouped or
not. And some won’t pay if you’re no longer signed to the label when the
breakage happens.

DOWNLOADS
A digital download, which is also called a DPD (standing for digital
phonorecord delivery), is a transmission to the consumer (via Internet,
satellite, cell phone, carrier pigeon, etc.) that allows the buyer to download
music for later use. For example, songs sold via the iTunes download store.
Sales of DPDs are falling, but they’re still around as I write this, so let’s take a
few minutes to understand them.
There are two kinds of downloads:
1. Permanent downloads. As the name implies, it’s yours forever, and
you can copy it, burn it, stomp it, or do anything else your heart desires.
Well, actually not “anything.” When you sign up with a digital retailer,
the ne print you never bother to read before you click “Accept”
contains something called an End-User License Agreement (her friends
know her as EULA, pronounced “You-Lah”). In that little bit of
literature, buried among other exciting words and phrases, it says that
the downloads are only for your personal, noncommercial use.
2. Tethered downloads. Tether, which is a fancy word for leash, means
the service provider doesn’t give you complete control over the
download. These are also known as conditional downloads. For
example, Spotify allows you to load songs onto your phone so you can
listen o ine, but if you stop paying your subscription, they send little
gnomes over the Web to eat your music.

For iTunes-type permanent downloads, the record companies get what they
call a “wholesale price” equal to 70% of the retail price (the other 30% is kept by
the platform, such as iTunes, that sells the download). For example, the labels
get about 91¢ for a 1.29¢ download, so if you have a 10% royalty, you’ll get
9.1¢.
Tethered downloads are treated exactly like interactive streaming, meaning
you get your royalty rate applied against the company’s receipts.

NON-INTERACTIVE STREAMING AND SATELLITE
RADIO
Non-interactive streaming (also called webcasting) means you can only hear
what the programmer decides to play (just like over-the-air radio stations).
Pandora is by far the biggest non-interactive streamer, and another example is
iHeartRadio. Also, there are tons of local radio simulcasts, which means
broadcasts that are streamed on the Internet at the same time they’re broadcast
over the air. A service called Tune-in aggregates the local stations and lets you
access them on the Internet through your app. (On a personal note, I kinda got
hooked to a small town station in Texas, where I particularly like the local ads.
I’d never before heard a children’s chorus singing a happy tune to advertise a
crematorium. Honest.)
On an even smaller scale, there are individual webcasters who put together
music they think is cool and send it out to the world.
Most of these webcasts are advertiser supported, but they can be paid
subscription as well (for example, Pandora o ers both).
Satellite radio, not surprisingly, sends music over a satellite rather than the
Web. The biggest player in this area by far is Sirius XM, which is subscription
based. Sirius XM is non-interactive, meaning you have to listen to whatever
they decide to play (as opposed to interactive, where you can tell it what to
play). And unlike Pandora, you can’t skip songs or customize the content (other
than by changing stations, which has been a form of interactivity ever since a
second radio broadcaster started transmitting in the 1920s).

For non-interactive webcasting and satellite radio, the copyright law requires
record companies to license their recordings at a rate set by the government.
This is called a statutory rate, because the rate is set by a statute (a law). The
money is not paid by the broadcaster directly to the labels, but instead it’s paid
to an out t called SoundExchange, who then pays the labels and artists. Exactly
how this works is pretty complicated, and I want you to stay awake for the
moment, so I stuck it further back in the book (on page 328 if you can’t wait).

VIDEO STREAMING
Video streaming deals between record companies and YouTube or other
interactive video services pay the record company the same percentage (mid50%) as the audio deals if the video is produced by a record company. All other
videos that use music (such as a little old lady moshing to a punk rock track) are
called user-generated content (known in the trade as UGC), because they’re
created by a user of the video service rather than a company. Record companies
are paid for UGC that uses their recordings, but at a lower rate than they get for
a record company–created video. That’s because their recording is only part of
UGC video content; the rest is created by a user. The only exception is a UGC
video that really does nothing more than showcase the music (for example, a
video that plays a song all the way through while showing the album cover,
pictures of the artist, lyrics, in atable ducks, etc.). These showcase videos are
paid at the same rate as a video made by the record company.
If the UGC is a video of someone sitting at a piano and playing a song, then
the record company gets nothing because there’s no use of their recording.
Only the songwriters get paid, and we’ll talk about what they get later (on page
246).

Synchronization and Transcription Licenses
A synchronization license is a license to use a recording in “timed
synchronization” with visual images. It’s also called a sync (pronounced “sink”)
license, and sometimes spelled synch (also pronounced like a bathroom basin).

A classic example is a song in a motion picture, where the song is synchronized
with the action on the screen. This license also includes television programs,
commercials, audiovisual streaming, video games, home video devices, etc.
Interestingly, it doesn’t include radio or other audio-only commercials or
podcasts (since they’re not synchronized with visuals). Those licenses are called
transcription licenses.
For these licenses, the company gives you 50% of their net receipts, meaning
the company’s gross receipts less any third-party payments, the company’s direct
costs for duplication, shipping, etc.
The amount of money that the companies get for recording licenses is
almost always the same amount charged by the publishers for use of the song,
which we’ll discuss in detail on page 252. If you ip ahead, don’t forget to come
back.

SAMPLES
Sampling means using a part of your recording in someone else’s record (or
licensing someone else’s recording for use in your recording). Sampling is
somewhat legally complicated, so I’d like you to understand a few more
concepts before we tackle it. When we get to it on page 262, I’ll tell you what
you can expect if someone samples your recording (which is also what you have
to pay if you sample someone else’s recording).

GUEST ARTISTS, FEATURED ARTISTS, AND JOINT
RECORDINGS
A joint recording (keep the puns to yourself; it means a work created “jointly”
by the e orts of two or more people) is where more than two royalty artists get
together on the same song, such as a duet. Joint recording is the term we use in
contracts, but in the real world, these are called guest artist deals, because one
of the artists is “guesting” on the other artist’s record. They’re also called
featured artist deals, or collaborations, or I’m more important than you

are, so you’re lucky to have me on your record (well, maybe not the last one,
at least out loud).
These deals are becoming more and more common, particularly in hip-hop
and pop. A major guest artist can generate visibility for a lesser-known artist’s
track, which of course translates into a lot more streams. Which translates into
more visibility for the artist.
How everyone gets paid really isn’t covered in your record deal, because it’s
gured out case by case. When artists decide to collaborate, they negotiate with
each other for the royalties and any advances. If you and the other artist aren’t
signed to the same label, the two labels also have to make a deal with each other
before the record can go out.
Here’s how it works:

Guest Artist Royalties
Historically, the most common arrangement for guest artists was to split the
royalty among the artists in proportion to their numbers. So if it is a duet, each
gets half; if there are three artists, each gets a third; etc. This is still the case when
two artists of about equal stature get together, but more commonly, the guest
artist gets a speci c royalty rate. We’ll talk about the range of those in a minute.
If it’s a straight split of royalties, watch out for the following:
1. If you do a duet with a ve-piece group, be sure that the group only
counts as one entity. Otherwise, the company might say there are six
royalty artists instead of two (you and the group), and you’ll only get
one-sixth of the royalty instead of one-half.
2. Whose royalty gets divided, yours or theirs? If you’re the star, and you’re
on someone else’s record, you want a share of your royalty, because it’s
likely to be higher than the other bozo. If you’re new and singing with a
star, try for a piece of theirs.
Whatever gets divided, it’s after deducting third-party royalties, like
producers’, mixers’, and sample royalties. Also, it’s computed just like all other

artist royalties, meaning you get paid after recoupment of all costs charged by
the record label, such as recording costs, video costs, promotional costs, etc. If,
instead of splitting, you negotiate a speci c guest royalty, it can run anywhere
from a few points (3% to 4%), if you’re only singing a small part on the record,
up to 10% for major stars. If the deal is for a negotiated royalty, it shouldn’t be
reduced for producer or mixer royalties.
Sometimes artists do what’s called a swap, where the guest takes no royalty
in exchange for a future performance by the other artist. For example, if
Benjamin appears on Talia’s record and takes no royalty, Talia agrees to sing on
one of Benjamin’s records for no royalty. The problem with swap deals among
bigger artists is (a) it’s hard to schedule the second recording because there’s
usually a tight delivery date and major artists are slammed; (b) you’re in the
middle of promoting your own records and your label doesn’t want your voice
on someone else’s record during that time frame; and (c) creatively, you may
not like the future track.
Guest artist deals get even more complicated in hip-hop and EDM. For
example, some guest artists take a tiny royalty but want a huge advance that they
can’t possibly recoup. Also, some producers think they’re artists, so they ask for
more points than they’d normally get as a producer.
If the guest artist is also a writer, the main artist should require the guest to
go along with their controlled composition clause. That means nothing to you
because we haven’t talked about it yet, but it’s an important point, so make a
note of it if you’re doing a guest deal. We’ll get to this baby on page 179.
You also need the guest artist to sign a SoundExchange letter of direction for
the producer (as we discussed on page 135).
As noted above, often the guest artist and the primary artist are signed to
di erent labels. In this case, you can’t do anything until the labels work out a
clearance, which we’ll discuss on page 179. So it’s essential to alert your label as
soon as you get a case of “guest-itis,” and certainly don’t start recording until the
labels have signed o .

APPS

Here we’re talking about apps that use music as the primary purpose of the app
(such as Garage Band, Beat Fever, karaoke apps, instructional music apps, etc.)
or that use music as an important element of the app (like Flipagram, video
games with music in the background, tness apps such as Peloton, Aaptiv, and
Soul Cycle). I’m not talking about apps that just let you access streaming music,
such as Spotify, Apple Music, or iHeartRadio, which we already covered.
The payment for music in apps is all over the place, mostly because the apps
are all over the place. If an app isn’t primarily a music product (for example, a
game where you chase turkeys around the barnyard while listening to death
metal), the deal is usually a at fee in the range of $500 to $10,000 per song,
depending on how much of the song is used and the stature of the song. These
licenses are always short—generally one year to eighteen months—so if the app
succeeds, the company can ratchet up the money on the next round.
If an app is monetized, meaning it generates money after the initial
download (for example ad sales, subscription fees, in-app purchases, emoticons,
etc.), there may be a revenue share on top of the fee, running anywhere from
15% to 35%, depending on usage and the song. In computing these percentages,
the app developer wants to deduct the fee that’s charged by the platform where
consumers get the app, called a platform fee (e.g., the iTunes store charges 30%
of every purchase), and they also want to deduct the cost of ad sales. These are
negotiable by the label, depending on bargaining power, but the norm is to at
least allow them to deduct the 30% platform fee. For example, if an app sells for
a dollar, iTunes takes 30¢ for selling the app, and the app developer gets 70¢. If
your company’s share of the money is 20%, it gets that portion of the 70¢,
meaning 14¢.
If the app is subscriber based, there will usually be a per-subscriber minimum
(we discussed this concept on page 144).
In revenue-sharing deals, there’s almost always an advance against the
royalty. The amount is totally dependent on the speci c situation, the
importance of the song, and the nature of the use. It can run from a hundred
dollars per song into the thousands. Sometimes these are deals for all the
recordings in the company’s catalog (subject to the artist’s approval where
required), and in that case, the advance can be really big bucks.

Even if the app has no revenue after the initial download, the record
companies sometimes charge a yearly fee (a at fee or a minimum per user) for
as long as your music is in the app. Note this means the app developers are
paying these fees out of their own pocket, because there’s no additional money
coming in. They’re willing to do this because they’re building up a user base
(which makes their business more valuable), and that’s more important to them
than making a pro t in the short term.
Another variation is called a step deal, where there’s an initial fee, and an
additional fee for a certain number of downloads.
A recent trend is for record companies to ask that app developers link to a
Spotify or Apple Music account. In other words, the music isn’t embedded in
the app, but rather linked to a DSP that streams the music. That way, each time
the song is streamed, the label gets paid under its deal with the streaming service.
You might be surprised to hear that song identi ers like Shazam and
SoundHound don’t pay for music at all. That’s because they don’t actually have
any music in their apps. All they do is digitally ngerprint the music (meaning
they break it down into little digital chunks), then match those identi ers
against what they’re “hearing.” Nonetheless, the labels all have deals with these
apps, because they view the service as highly promotional (for example, Shazam
lets you add a song to your Spotify playlist when you identify it). Even more
important, the labels want the app’s data of which songs people are chasing
down.
If you’re on the Fast Track, skip ahead to page 173, starting with Accountings.
Everyone else, right on…

VIDEO GAMES
Here we’re talking about true video games (think Call of Duty, FIFA, or Grand
Theft Auto), rather than apps, which we just discussed.
Except for games where music is an essential part (like Guitar Hero, R.I.P.),
the licenses are on a at-fee basis. And the fees are low, because the video

companies don’t believe that any particular song means more people will play
the game.
The fees that labels get for these deals are the same amounts that songwriters
get, which we’ll discuss later (on page 258).
A new development in this world is the virtual concert inside a video game,
along with digital merchandise. Which leads nicely into our next topic:

WEB3, THE METAVERSE, NFTS, AND THINGS THAT
GO BUMP IN THE NIGHT
This section is a challenge, as it’s evolving so quickly that there’s no way it won’t
be out of date by the time you read this. So I’ll stick to the big picture and try to
give you a sense of this world.
Let’s start with some of the terminology. Web3 is the latest version of, not so
surprisingly, Web1 and Web2. Web1 was the very early days on the Internet,
which was primarily about users reading information that someone else put up,
and there were very few content creators. Web2 (still the dominant alpha lion) is
still about reading, but it’s also about posting content and engaging with other
users.
Web3 is the same as Web2, except it’s decentralized. What the hell does that
mean? Well, today the big platforms (Google, Amazon, TikTok, YouTube, etc,)
are centralized, meaning they’re controlled by one company. In other words,
Mark Zuckerberg could wake up one morning, decide he’s had enough of
Meta, and turn out the lights for all users. Then poof, all your pictures of exotic
food go to Neverland. A decentralized platform, however, is spread over a
number of computers around the world (people voluntarily let the system use
their computers), meaning no one has control. So far, these various
decentralized systems are not interoperative (meaning you can’t transport your
avatar from one system to another); in essence, they are a bunch of di erent
platforms. Some folks are trying to create a centralized Web3 space, like
Facebook’s Horizon, though it’s still in early stages.
The Metaverse, which is a term that comes from Neil Stephenson’s novel
Snow Crash, means a virtual world. It can live on Web3, but it also lives on

Web2. Examples today are Roblox, Fortnite, and The Sandbox.
The other term to understand is Non-Fungible Token, also known as NFT
to people who don’t want to take the time to pronounce all the words. In
essence, NFTs are unique digital assets, meaning they’re constructed (by a
process called minting) in a way that can’t be duplicated. High-pro le examples
are NFT works of art that sold for multimillions in the beginning, though the
whole NFT market has cooled (some might say “crashed”) radically at the time
of this writing. That’s in part because virtual currencies like Bitcoin took a
major hit, but it may be more about the fact that some early buyers tried to resell their NFTs and got very little. (Interestingly, sometimes the NFTs don’t
even contain the music or artwork; they are just a pointer to a le that exists on
a server. And if you have the address of the le, you can access it without
owning the NFT.)
For the record, I really don’t understand the appeal of NFT art; most of the
time, the same digital le is available for free, though I suppose that’s the
di erence between buying a Picasso poster versus the original painting.
However, I understand the idea of hanging a Picasso in your living room to
impress your friends, but what do you do with the NFT? Put it on a TV screen?
Hang it in your virtual house? At least to me, that’s not worth millions, but I’m
probably not the targeted demographic.
So what’s happening with music in these places?
Well… not much so far. A few artists have tried selling their albums as NFTs,
with some bites along the way, but no massive successes. It seems, in a streaming
age, that ownership is not so highly rated. Steve Aoki has an NFT collection that
has done well, but a lot of it is artwork. And while there’s talk of using NFTs for
event tickets, it doesn’t seem to be any real improvement over the current
digital tickets.
By the way, if you do an NFT that includes music, you need permission
from both your record company and your publishing company (because your
publisher controls the song, and your record company either controls the
recording, if it’s an existing recording, or the company has your exclusive
recording rights and can stop you from recording new stu for anyone besides
them).

NFTs with something tangible attached seem to be doing better. For
example, you might get a T-shirt when you buy an NFT, or a meet and greet
with the artist. This is really just another form of fan club experience, which
we’ll discuss on page 436. Another example is Coachella, which uses an NFT to
sell a premium experience, and they also do things like digital treasure hunts for
fans to earn extra points and get various goodies. Not surprisingly, some of the
digital hunts take you near the beer concession…
One advantage of NFTs is that they can be written with something called a
smart contract. That doesn’t mean a legal document, but rather a set of codes
that pay the artist every time the NFT is re-sold. This is a big change from the
current market for any kind of product; normally, once you sell something,
you’re done. For example, if Rothko sold a painting cheap when he was young
and hungry, and it re-sells for a thousand times that price, he’s only a bystander.
But if that painting had been an NFT, he’d get a percentage of the resale price
every time it changed hands. You can set your own percentage for re-sales,
though if it’s too high, it hurts the value. OpenSea, which at the time of this
writing is the largest NFT marketplace, has a maximum resale payment of 10%.
While it’s tempting to go down the rabbit hole to NFT-Ville, it’s not that
relevant to music so far, so let’s move along. (If you’re interested, you can easily
get all the info on the Net. There are instructions on how to mint NFTs, how to
use the platforms to sell them, and so forth.)
Now to the Metaverse. We’re in such baby stages here that nothing major is
happening for music, but there’s promise. So far, the primary use of music is
around gaming. Examples are a concert by Lil Naz X on Roblox, and ones by
Marshmello and Ariana Grande on Fortnite. The artist performs live, and their
avatar appears in the virtual world onstage. In addition, the artists can sell digital
merchandise to fans through the game, like skins, meaning things to customize
your avatar, such as accessories (intergalactic ray guns) or digital clothing,
sometimes matching the costume that the artist wore during the concert. Some
artists even sell avatars that look like themselves, though somehow I don’t see
Adele in Battle Royale. While this sounds all nice and cutesy, the overall market
for skins is more than $40 billion per year.

Because this is still a new world, there haven’t been that many deals, and
none of them are public. It’s usually a at fee for the concert that varies with
your stature and the rights you give the gaming company (more about that in a
minute). The deals I know are con dential, but they’re usually less than the
artist would get for a live concert. One reason is that there’s no direct
monetization for the concert (the game playform doesn’t sell tickets; whoever is
playing the game can go for free).
As to each concert, you’ll want to limit the time they can keep it up, so
they’re not running it when your grandkids take up gaming. Usually, it’s only
for one day in each territory, though sometimes it’s longer if the company pays
more. However, this area is so new that there are few “norms” for comparison.
The gaming companies also want the rights to sell digital merchandise (the
skins we discussed a minute ago, as well as digital T-shirts, digital posters, etc.).
Some companies pay a royalty on the merch, though they prefer to give you an
extra fee called a buyout, meaning they get the rights and don’t pay any
royalties (in other words, they’re “buying out” your royalties). Keep this in your
mind when we get to physical merchandising deals in Chapter 24.
Under your record deal, the label has digital rights to your musical
performances, so they make the deal with the virtual world platform and collect
the income. If you have a more recent agreement, it may say that they apply
your royalty against the fee (e.g., if you have a 20% royalty, you get 20% of the
fee), or if you have an older deal, it’s treated as licensing income that’s split
50/50. You should push for the 50/50, even if you have a more recent deal,
because you’re giving the company product that they wouldn’t otherwise have.
Whatever you get, the company will treat it like any other income and use your
share to recoup any de cit. If you’ve got some clout, try to have some or all of it
paid without recoupment. Maybe you get it, maybe you don’t.
Note that digital merch is not music. It’s just your name and likeness, so you
should make sure that gets paid outside your record deal. But even in that case,
the company will want a percentage for bringing you the deal (called sourcing),
likely in the 10% range. Or if they have 360 rights that apply to digital merch,
they’ll get that percentage.

All in all, because the numbers aren’t huge, most artists see virtual concerts
as a cool branding move. But things may change in the future.

BUNDLES
A bundle is a combination of stu (a “bundle” of products, so to speak…) that
you get for a single price. For example, you get a basic music streaming service
when you subscribe to Amazon Prime.
What labels get for bundled services is all over the map, so unfortunately I
can’t give you a lot of speci c guidance. It depends on what music is o ered,
what the other product is, whether a consumer automatically gets the music as
part of the purchase or whether they pay more for it (called an add-on), how
much the service is getting for the bundle, what the executives had for breakfast,
etc.
In the broadest of strokes, the record company and bundler agree on a
percentage of the bundle’s price that’s allocated to the music. The bundler then
pays that percentage to the record company and you get your share of it. Or
sometimes the music payment isn’t a percentage of the price, but rather a at fee
for each bundle (for example, every time the bundler sells a widget, the record
label gets $3). Sometimes it’s a bundle of $100 bills in a brown paper bag (just
kidding about the last one, in case we’re being wiretapped).

TELEVISION AND OTHER ADVERTISING
A number of years ago, record companies gured out (only in Europe at the
time) that they could sell a lot of records by doing short bursts of television
advertising. In fact, this worked so well that it quickly exported itself to America
and other territories. Today, it’s not really the case in the United States at all,
and driving “sales” is a disappearing game. However, these provisions are still in
many contracts. In fact, some companies have expanded them to include radio,
print, Internet, or movie theater ad campaigns in the U.S.
Most record company form contracts say they can recoup these costs from
your royalty, meaning if you’re successful, you’re paying for it.

With some clout, you can push back. Usual compromises are to let them
only recoup a portion (50%) of the costs, or to reduce your royalty on the
advertised album to 50% for as long as they can get away with. They love to get
two years, and I love to give them much less. Here are some things to ask for:
1. Get approval of the campaigns and spending before they can deduct
anything.
2. Try to restrict the reduction to only those royalties you earn during the
quarterly or semiannual accounting period during which the campaign
is launched and the following period (maybe a third period after that, if
you have to). The idea is to keep the reduction period close to the
campaign, so the reduction is only of money generated by these ads.
3. The total amount taken from your royalty shouldn’t exceed half the cost
of the campaign.
4. Make certain they can only reduce the royalties in those territories where
the campaign is running—you’d be surprised what their little forms say
about taking reductions everywhere.

PODCASTS
Not much money in podcasts. Mostly they’re free to the user, as they’re ad
supported.
Licenses are usually done on a at-fee basis, in the range of $2,500 to $5,000
(though it can go much higher for a major song usage). Sometimes the labels
also get a percentage of the ad revenues.
A number of podcasters seem to just go ahead and use the music without
asking anybody, hoping they’re small enough that no one bothers. I don’t
recommend this…

MULTIPLE ALBUMS/BOX SETS
The multiple album went through an enormous change when vinyl fell o a
cli years ago. Originally it meant an album that couldn’t t on one vinyl disc,

since vinyl discs were limited to a maximum of fty-some-odd minutes of
playing time. Then it meant more than one cassette. When CDs appeared, they
could hold substantially more music than a vinyl disc or single cassette, so it
took a lot of songs to require two CDs. Thus multiple albums (in the classic
sense of a two-CD package) were rare.
When they existed, there was a complicated royalty formula, because the
increased manufacturing and packaging costs (as well as increased payments to
songwriters) meant the company had a smaller pro t margin, even with a higher
price. Prior editions of the book had the formulas, but they’re now pretty much
irrelevant, so I’ll spare you. And frankly, they bored me, too.
But like any good zombie movie, multiple albums came back from the dead,
ironically in part because vinyl has come back. In this new life form, they are
box sets, meaning a collection of multiple vinyl or CDs, and usually a career
retrospective, targeted at superfans. They may contain reissues of old albums,
unreleased cuts, alternative versions of well-known songs, and demo
recordings. Often there’s non-music stu as well, like posters, compromising
photos, etc. They can also be a retrospective of a company (for example, Capitol
or Motown) or a genre (the Blues, the De nitive Chicken Dance), etc. And
they’re very high-priced, which means their sales potential is limited.
The royalties on box sets are always negotiated when the product is being put
together, and they’re very speci c to the particular package. They’ll depend on
the selling price, manufacturing costs, number of selections (which a ects the
songwriters’ royalties—we’ll discuss those later), cost of licensing tracks from
other labels, size of the artist’s original royalty rate, and your leverage.
Unfortunately, there are no real guidelines because every package is so unique,
except that there’s usually a reduced artist royalty and almost always a reduced
songwriter royalty.
So now that you fully understand royalties, it’s time to talk about pro t shares.

PROFIT SHARE

Superstars and artists with major heat can often get a share of the record label’s
pro ts from your recordings rather than a royalty. So let’s talk about how that
works.
Basically, the label takes all of the income that comes in (the gross proceeds
from streams, downloads, licensing income, etc.) and puts it in a pot. Then they
take all the expenses of operations out of that pot, and whatever is left over gets
split between the two entities. The normal split is 50/50, though the record
companies play games with how they compute pro ts, as you’ll see in a minute.
And sometimes you can even get more than 50%, but this is rare.

Computation of Proﬁts
Here’s how the label computes pro ts for purposes of what you share in:
Income Side. Gross receipts are the monies received by the record company,
which is easy to compute if the distributor is independent—it’s whatever the
distributor pays to your label. However, as we discussed on page 73, all the
major distributors are owned by the major record companies. This means you
get a di erent de nition of gross receipts when your pro t-sharing deal is with a
major. Why? Well, if the same person owns both the distributor and the record
company, they can set any price they want between the two of them. To use an
absurd example, the distributor might get $100 from streaming and only pay
$20 back to the record company, simply to hose you.
The way it’s handled is by treating the amount received by the major label’s
distribution division as the gross, then taking a negotiated distribution fee o
that before it goes into the pot. We’ll discuss the range of those fees in the next
section.
When U.S. companies license your recordings to foreign territories, they
generally get a royalty from those territories and that income is treated as gross
receipts. For example, if they get 25% of the monies earned in Lithuania, that
goes into the pot as gross receipts and is used for determining your share of
pro ts. With indie labels, this is pretty straightforward. However, with the
majors, it only applies to unrelated companies (meaning those not owned by

the label) and there are very few of those, just in itty-bitty territories. So what
about related foreign companies?
When the foreign distributor is owned by the same company that owns your
record company, they establish an intra-company rate, meaning a royalty that
the foreign distributor pays the U.S. company. For example, the French division
might pay a 30% royalty (not a real royalty gure; the companies are very
precious about disclosing actual royalty rates) to the U.S. company (meaning
30% of the French company’s receipts go back to the U.S.). This rate is in place
even when you have no pro t share deal, as it’s used by the U.S. company to
compute its pro ts and losses in reporting earnings to the parent company. And
in determining the label head’s bonus.
Unfortunately, you rarely get the true intra-company rate for purposes of
computing your pro t share. Unless you have a lot of clout, the companies
designate a foreign royalty that is less than the intra-company rate to go into the
pot. For example, the intra-company rate might be 30%, but they only use a
25% royalty for purposes of computing your pro ts. They do this for two
reasons: (a) because their U.S. international sta is involved in working the
foreign territories, they say the U.S. label should get something for that, and (b)
they get to keep more money that way. Nonetheless, try to get the full rate into
the pot. But if you don’t have a lot of clout, prepare for disappointment.
Note the result of this foreign royalty practice is that you only share pro ts
for U.S. sales. On foreign sales, it’s simply a sharing of the royalty paid to the
U.S. company.
Expenses. From this gross, the label deducts as many expenses and other
charges as they can get away with. They consist of the following:
1. The rst thing deducted is a distribution fee for the record company.
(There’s a golden rule for record labels: If you’re getting a percentage,
take it out rst because that way it’s applied to the biggest number.) The
distribution fee is a charge to cover the cost of overseeing the distribution
of records, meaning the accounting, invoicing, manufacturing, etc.

(note this is for the job of overseeing; the actual costs of manufacturing,
for example, are charged as well). This will run somewhere in the 15% to
20% range, sometimes even higher, and it includes the distribution fee
charged to the company by its distributor.
It’s often possible to reduce this fee as volume increases, usually on a
yearly basis. For example, the fee could be 20% of the rst $5 million
each year, 19% of the next $5 million, and 18% thereafter. At the
beginning of the following year, the fee would start again at 20%.
Note the distribution fee should only apply to your U.S. income. The
U.S. company is not your distributor in foreign territories; the local
companies are. Meaning the local companies bear all expenses and only
pay a royalty to the U.S. company
If you’re reading between the lines, you’ll notice that above is what
you’ll be charged in computing your pro ts under a pro t share deal,
and it may have no relationship to what the record company is actually
charged by its distributor. And what, you ask, are the labels actually
charged by the distributor? Well…
Before I tell you what distribution fee they get charged, let’s look at
the big picture. Major record labels are judged by their pro ts and losses,
separate from the pro ts and losses of the company that owns them. For
example, the executives at Warner Records get bonuses (or get red)
based on the nancial performance of Warner Records, and the
executives at Atlantic Records (which is owned by the same people who
own Warner Records) get rewarded on the basis of Atlantic’s
performance. (An element of the executive bonuses at the major labels is
the overall company performance, but a major chunk is usually the
performance of the label for which the executive is responsible.)
Let’s use Atlantic as an example. To gure out Atlantic’s pro ts, you
have to know its costs. If Atlantic were a stand-alone company, it would
have to make a deal with someone to distribute its records, and that
distributor’s charges would be an expense for Atlantic. Because Atlantic
is owned by Warner Music Group (WMG), it’s forced to make a deal
with WEA Distribution (also owned by WMG). However, just because

they have the same owner, it doesn’t mean Atlantic gets a free ride. It has
to pay a fee to WEA Distribution for handling Atlantic’s records.
In one sense, this distribution fee is a ction, because the money
moves from one WMG pocket to another. But it’s not a ction to the
executives at Atlantic. The bigger it is, the more it reduces Atlantic’s
pro ts (and the executives’ bonuses). Same thing on the other side, for
the executives at the distribution company.
Typically, the distribution fees charged by a major distributor to an
a liated major label are in the 14% range. In your joint venture, if
you’ve got a lot of clout, you may be able to get the same distribution fee
that the label is charged. In other words, if Atlantic pays 14% to WMG (I
have no idea if that’s correct), you’d only be charged 14% in computing
the pro ts. However, that’s only if you’ve got a lot of bargaining power.
In the beginning, you’ll pay quite a bit more, as noted above.
2. Next deduction is the costs of operation. In addition to the costs you’d
normally expect (recording costs, advances, etc.), there are a number of
things that aren’t charged under royalty deals. These include:
(a) Advertising and marketing
(b) Mechanical royalties (we’ll discuss these later, on page 219)
(c) Per-record union payments (coming later, on page 193)
(d) Manufacturing and shipping of physical goods
3. Whatever advance you got against your pro ts would be recouped from
your share of monies before you’re paid, just like an advance against
royalties.

Royalty Versus Proﬁt Share
So how about the key question: Are you better o with a pro t share or with a
royalty arrangement? To answer this requires a crystal ball, both as to success,
and especially as to foreign income (where you’re not sharing in pro ts). It also
depends on how high the royalty rate would be, and what percentage of pro ts
you’re getting.

As a general rule, if you’re extremely successful, certainly in the United
States, you’re better o with a joint venture. With modest success, you’re better
o under a royalty arrangement. (If you’re a turkey, it doesn’t really matter.)
Here’s why:
As we discussed, you’re charged for more costs in a pro t share than you are
under a royalty deal, and thus with only modest success, you’re behind.
However, many of these costs are not “per transaction,” meaning they’re only
paid at the beginning, as opposed to “per-transaction” costs that are incurred for
each stream or sale (“transaction”) made. For example, per-transaction charges
are costs of mechanical royalties (the monies paid to songwriters who wrote the
songs in the recording, to the extent those are paid by the label, which they are
not for streaming), union per-record charges [see page 193], and
manufacturing and freight for physical goods. Those are only paid when a
transaction happens. Costs that are not per-transaction are such things as
recording costs, artwork, videos, promotion, marketing, and advertising, which
are unrelated to speci c exploitations. Thus, with a great deal of success, the
non-per-transaction costs are eaten up by the rst dollars that come in, and
thereafter the pro t per unit is more than a royalty arrangement. Also, your
share of pro ts is likely to be greater than a royalty rate (even after deducting
charges that aren’t deducted in computing royalties, like distribution/overhead
fees).
On the other hand, if you have massive success in foreign markets, you may
be behind. While the foreign royalty going into the pot is generous, you only
get half of it. And that may well be less than you could get as a superstar having
a direct royalty.
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track, go to the Accounting section on page
173. Experts, straight ahead.

DEARLY DEPARTING CONTRACT CLAUSES

Cue the somber Funeral Dirge. You’re now entering the Dying and Truly Dead
section of the music biz. Please speak softly.
Despite the fact that these contract clauses are almost irrelevant, either
because they deal with physical and downloads, or because the practice they
cover has disappeared, virtually every record contract still has these provisions.
So let’s hit them brie y. If you nd yourself dozing o , skip to the
Accounting section on page 173 (which isn’t exactly riveting…).

Reserve Limitations
Reserves are money that the company holds back in case your physical product
is returned (as we discussed on page 85). Limiting reserves used to be a big deal
when CDs were the only game, but since CDs bit the big one, and even with
vinyl on the rise, this clause is becoming less and less relevant. But for the
moment physical product is still alive, so reserve limitations are worth asking
for.
You should ask to limit your reserves to around 35% to 50% of the records
shipped, which was historically the norm. But companies don’t like speci c
percentage limitations these days, because the physical market is so weird.
Instead, they just want to say “reasonable reserves.” That language is better than
nothing at all, because it at least gives you the right to argue with them if you
think they’re taking too much.
In any event, you should make sure that your agreement says they can’t take
reserves on digital exploitations, because digital sales are what the industry calls
one-way, meaning that they can’t be returned. Therefore there’s no reason to
hold a reserve. Most companies won’t take digital reserves, even if their
agreement says they can, but you should say so anyway.
At midlevel and up, you can also force the company to liquidate (meaning
“pay out”) the reserves over a set period of time, usually two years. Try to make
the liquidation ratable, meaning they have to pay an equal amount each time.
For example, if the company has to liquidate your reserves over two years, that
means four six-month accounting periods. If they’re required to liquidate
ratably, they have to pay you one-fourth of the reserves in each of the four

periods. If you don’t say this, they could pay you a small percentage in the rst
three periods and hold the bulk of your money until the end.

Mid-Price Records
After a record has had its initial run in current release, it’s known as a catalog
item, meaning it’s listed in the company’s catalog of available titles but isn’t
being currently promoted. Some catalog items are issued at mid-price,
meaning a reduced price that’s designed to encourage consumers to buy older
titles. The contractual de nition of a mid-price record (with slight variations
from company to company) is one “with a PPD between 66.6% and 80% of the
price for newly released top-line records.” Some companies go as high as 85%
for mid-price. The lower you can keep that percentage of the top-line price in
the de nition of mid-price, the better for you. That’s because your royalty goes
down when you get there, as you’re about to see:

Royalty
The royalty for mid-price is usually from 66.66% to 75% of the U.S. basic rate
(if you have a 10% royalty, that means 6.66% to 7.5%). Note this is a double
whammy—not only is the royalty rate lower, but the PPD on which it’s based is
also lower. The record companies justify this because their wholesale price is
less, and accordingly so is their pro t margin.
As you gain clout, you can negotiate a period of time after initial release
before a record can be sold at mid-price (usually twelve months, moving up to
eighteen with some clout), or sometimes even a at prohibition without your
consent.
If you do get restrictions, it’ll only be for the United States. That’s because,
in some foreign territories, mid-price is customary for the rst release.
Presumably, your interests and the record company’s are the same, since they
want to maximize their pro ts in that territory. Thus they won’t put something
out at mid-price unless they believe the reduced price will promote enough
extra sales to justify the lower pro t margin.

Presumably…

Budget Records
The next step down from mid-price is budget, which means the company
doesn’t think it can sell the stu unless it knocks the price WAY down. The
contractual de nition of budget records is one with a price of less than 66.6% of
the top-line price, but sometimes there’s no mid-price de nition and the
contract says everything under 80% of the top-line price is a budget record.

Royalty
The royalty on budget records is usually 50% of the top-line royalty rate, or 5%
in our 10% example. With some clout, you can hold back budget records for a
period after initial release. Because your being on a budget line is a statement
about what the company thinks of your career, you can usually get a longer
holdback than you can for mid-price. For example, in the United States, the
company might agree to wait twelve to eighteen months after initial release
(which you can push to two years with some clout). Again, foreign markets
have their own peculiarities, and there will be little you can do unless you’re a
major artist in a particular territory.
As your muscle increases, you may be able to get a at prohibition against
budget, at least during the term of your agreement. And, if you can’t get the
right to consent to budget records after the term, a compromise is to say they
can’t do it as long as your account is recouped. The idea is that, if they’ve lost
money on your project, they can do whatever they want to get even, but
otherwise they should keep you o the budget line.

Deletes, Scraps, and Other Food for Bottom
Feeders
When a company nds that an album isn’t selling at mid-price or budget, either
because nobody cares about it or because the company overmanufactured

and/or had gigantic returns, it looks for a way to bail out for whatever it can get.
These used to be called cutouts because they were cut out of the company’s
catalog of available recordings, but since the days of streaming, nothing gets cut
out—forgotten songs just sit on the streaming services like some old dog
sleeping in a cobwebbed corner.
When the company decides physical product isn’t going to sell, the leftovers
are sometimes sold as scrap, to be broken up for their component parts. If not,
they’re sold as schlock, which means they’re put in the bins for 99¢, $1.50, etc.
Artists get no royalties for these, as the company says (correctly) that they’re sold
at cost or below, just to get rid of them. Also, most forms say that any sales
under 50% of the top-line price don’t bear royalties at all.
With negotiating power, you can say that the company can’t schlock your
records sooner than eighteen to twenty-four months after initial release, or with
some clout, twenty-four to thirty-six months after release. (Note that you
impose this limit for schlock, not scrap. You can’t restrict their ability to sell
records as scrap because the public never knows about it; schlock, however, tells
the world that your records are t for lining parakeet cages.) You can also get the
right to buy these records at the best price o ered to the record company, but
I’ve never felt this is of any practical value. You’re not likely to be able to sell
them at a better price than the company, and what are you going to do with ten
thousand dogs?

Coupling and Compilations
The practice of putting your performances on records with performances of
other artists is known as coupling, and albums with a bunch of di erent artists
are called compilations. In days of yore, compilations such as the NOW series
sold multimillions, but in the streaming age, people can just listen to the tracks
they like, or create their own playlist compilation. To the extent compilation
albums exist, they’re almost exclusively soundtrack albums from motion
pictures with diverse music (O Brother, Where Art Thou?, Pulp Fiction, etc.).
And even those are mostly just playlists on a DSP.

Royalties
The royalty on coupled products sold by your record company is pretty much
what you’d think—if there are ten cuts on the album and you did one of them,
you get one-tenth of your normal royalty; if you did two cuts out of ten, you
get 20%, etc. This process is called pro-ration, and you are said to have a prorata royalty (meaning your royalty is in proportion to the number of cuts on
the album). Sometimes, however, your company will want to negotiate a
speci c royalty for the compilation, and guess which way they want your
royalty to go?
If your company doesn’t release the compilation album, but rather licenses
your track to another company who releases it, your royalty is usually 50% of
the company’s licensing receipts from your track, though a few labels just pay a
lower royalty for compilations (pro-rated by the number of cuts). Remember,
under an all-in royalty deal, your share includes the producer’s royalty (we
discussed the producer’s share of this on page 124).

Control
You should always try to control coupling, and while this used to be a ght
because the record company could make money from licensing you out, the
digital age has made this way less relevant (some would say irrelevant, though
we’re not quite there yet). I would still ask for it, both for (1) the artistic reason
that you don’t want to be on a record with someone you hate, and (2) the
nancial reason that you can make sure you think the deal is worthwhile. With
moderate bargaining power, you can control coupling during the term of your
deal, but the companies carve out things like playlists on streaming services,
jukeboxes, in-transit uses (like in- ight programs), and similar stu . With more
bargaining power, you can control it after the term, at least if you’re recouped.
If you get control, it’s normally just for the United States, unless you have
incredible bargaining power.
Even as a new artist, you should at least be able to get a limit on the number
of couplings. A common provision is to say the company can’t couple more

than two of your selections per year, and can’t put you on more than two
albums per year. Note the di erence between these two concepts: If the
company’s only limit is two selections per year, they could put one of your hits
on thirty-seven di erent compilation albums.
Control is getting easier and easier to get these days because there are so few
compilations still around. Who needs them when you can make your own on a
streaming service?

Greatest Hits Albums
The royalties on Greatest Hits albums used to be a big deal (see page 118 for
what a Greatest Hits album is, and see the obituary section of your local
newspaper if you want to know how well they’re selling). Since they’re virtually
nonexistent today, it’s not worth saying much. Essentially, you get pro-rata
royalties (see page 170) for each track, based on the royalty rate of the album it
comes from. For example, if your rst two albums were 18%, and the others
20%, and if half the Greatest Hits album was from the rst two albums (18%)
and half from the others (20%), your royalty on the Greatest Hits album would
be 19% (50% times 18%, plus 50% times 20%).

Ringtones and Ringbacks
Ringtones are short clips of songs that play when your cell phone rings.
Ringbacks happen when you call someone and instead of hearing an annoying
ringing signal, you hear an annoying song. Ringtones are (were) something you
download and own, while ringbacks are held on the server of the phone service
provider, so you’re only “renting” them. Ringtones and ringbacks were at one
time a surprisingly strong business (doing sales in the billions per year), but they
took a major nosedive when it became easy to make your own for free and are
now virtually meaningless.
Record companies get about 50% of the retail price charged to the customer,
sometimes with a minimum amount per sale (the minimum puts a oor on
what the record company gets, no matter how low the consumer price drops).

So if a ringtone is $2.00, the record company gets $1.00, and if you have a 10%
royalty, you’ll get 10¢.

DVDS
The royalties on DVDs, another con guration on life support, are the same as
your audio record royalties.

Record Clubs
Record clubs are truly dead and buried. Except they don’t seem to know it,
because every record deal still has a provision for them.
Record clubs are (were) mail-order “clubs” that you joined by agreeing to
buy a certain number of records at a reduced price. In record contracts, the
labels give artists 50% of their net receipts from the record club, and since they
don’t exist, just take it.
I would make them get your consent before they include you in a record
club, so if they ever come back to life, you can gure out a deal.

Premiums
Premiums are records sold or given away in connection with a sponsor, such as
getting a free CD when you buy a new car. Nobody really cares about getting
CDs anymore, and in fact new cars don’t even have CD players. But contracts
still mention premiums, so at least you now know what they are.
The only thing you need in your contract is to say the company needs your
consent to use any of your music in a premium. You should really push for this,
because premiums use your music to sell another product, and you shouldn’t
be associated with any product without your consent. That’s a valuable right.
If the company can’t do anything without your consent, and premiums
make a miraculous recovery, you can decide if you want to play.

ACCOUNTINGS

When do you get your royalties? Twice a year, within ninety days after the close
of each calendar six-month period (except some companies use weird, noncalendar six-month periods). As I write this, a few companies are talking about
moving to a quarterly system, meaning you’d get paid every three months. Let’s
encourage them!

Objections
Your contract will say that each accounting becomes “ nal” (meaning you can
no longer argue it’s wrong) one or two years after the statement is sent to you.
If the companies didn’t say this, you’d have until four years after the statement
(in California) or six years after (in New York) within which to sue them. That
is, of course, precisely why they say it.
You can increase the objection period to two years, and often three years,
with minimal clout. Superstars can sometimes get four years. Always get the
longest period you can, because it’s uneconomical to audit unless you can cover
a number of years at once.
What’s auditing? Funny you should ask…

Audit Rights
Closely following the accounting clause is an audit clause, which says you can
audit (meaning send in an accountant to verify) the record company’s books.
This is a way of ensuring that you’re getting a fair reporting, and if you have any
success, you should do it. Audits are expensive ($35,000 to $50,000 or more),
so you’d better be recouped (or close to recoupment in the near future) before
you start. There’s not much joy in proving that, instead of being $1 million
unrecouped, you’re only $900,000 unrecouped. Most reputable auditors will
give you an indication of whether an audit is worthwhile before you engage
them. They do this by looking at your contract and your accounting statements
and knowing what the various record companies do.
Nowadays almost every record contract has a built-in right to audit,
although in the past you had to ask for it. The audit clause will also say you can’t

audit more than once in any twelve-month period, that you can’t examine any
particular accounting statement more than once, and that you can only audit
before the period to object has expired (see the above section).

13
Advanced Record Deal Points

EXCLUSIVITY
I’m sure you won’t be shocked to learn that every record contract includes a
provision that says the deal is exclusive. In other words, during the term of the
agreement, you can’t make records for anybody else. However, just like a TV
commercial for prescription drugs, let me give you a list of side e ects (pretend
there’s soft orchestral music playing while we talk about hair loss, suicidal
thoughts, and oily residue):

Motion Pictures
Remember, as we discussed on page 74, that companies now de ne “records” so
broadly that the term includes motion pictures, television appearances,
webcasts, and Ninja blenders (maybe not the last one). Put that together with
the fact that you can only make “records” for your label, and you’ll quickly see
that your company can stop you from singing in motion pictures or on
television, even where there’s no audio-only record involved. In fact, they can
stop you even if there’s no music involved, like the case when you’re the actor
in a lm. They can also stop you from being streamed when you appear at a
festival. Or appearing on a TV talk show even if you’re not singing. Isn’t that
just peachy-cute?

You can usually negotiate some slack in these, if you know what to ask.
Here’s a map.
If there’s no music involved, most companies will easily agree that you can
be an actor and let you keep all the money (though they may have a 360 share of
that money). Same with other non-musical performances, such as TV voiceovers, commercials, spoken word recordings, etc.
When you start performing music, things get stickier. You’ll need the label’s
permission, and if they let you, they’ll want a chunk of your money to let it
happen (we’ll discuss how much in a second). With respect to lms, the most
common compromise is that they may let you perform one or two songs in a
lm with a laundry list of restrictions, such as keeping the size of your name the
same as other artists, requiring a credit to the company, not granting any audioonly record rights, etc. With more leverage, you can do more songs as long as
you don’t give the lm company any audio-only record rights.
In either case, the record company will be looking for money. They usually
want 100% of what you’re paid to perform in the lm, of which they keep half
(for releasing you from your exclusivity) and credit the other half to your
account (meaning it’s paid to you if you’re recouped, or it’s used to recoup
your de cit if you’re not). If you’ve got some clout, you may be able to knock
down their percentage (say to 25%), or even keep the entire fee yourself.
But what about audio record rights? You’ve seen lots of artists with
recordings on soundtrack albums, often on di erent labels. How does that
happen?
Short answer: Not easily.
Record companies don’t want you freely dropping recordings on others
because (a) they want to be exclusively identi ed with you; (b) they don’t want
someone else releasing a record at a time that would con ict with one of your
own singles or albums (incidentally, neither should you, as you normally make
a lot less on soundtrack recordings than your own label’s recordings); and (c) if
they bend on these mighty principles, they want to get paid.
So how do people get on soundtrack albums? Well, it’s handled one of two
ways in your record deal:

Forget It. At some record companies, this is an absolute “religious issue”
(“sacred cow,” “irrefutable principle,” etc.—you get the idea), meaning you
have no right to let anyone else put out a soundtrack album with your
recording on it. In these cases, the artist throws himself or herself on the mercy
of the record company each time a lm company asks them to perform a song in
a movie. The record company either agrees to let the artist perform (with
restrictions—see below), or it refuses and the issue is closed (unless your
manager can yell loud enough to reopen it). The other choice is to force the lm
company to give the soundtrack album to your record company, because there
is then no con ict. If you’re important enough, you can do this, even if you’re
only on one track. The only complication would be an album with a lot of
artists on di erent labels, which is much more di cult because you have to feed
all the baby birdie mouths.
In the end, all this comes down to a conversation with your label when
there’s a speci c project. And it’s gotten easier over the last few years. In general,
your company doesn’t want to block opportunities for you, and they know that
your doing a movie song can be good for your career. Also, as we’ve discussed,
the idea today is “more product is better,” so they like the idea of having more
music from you. Especially music they don’t pay for, and music that has some
lm marketing dollars behind it. And of course the record company can get
paid for this, as you’ll see later.
Contractual Exclusions. If you have clout, you can negotiate an automatic
contractual soundtrack album exclusion in your record deal, at least with some
companies (or even with the sticklers if you’re King Kong). These typically have
some or all of the following laundry list (which will also apply if you have no
exclusion but get the company’s consent at the time):
1. You can’t perform on more than one (or two at most) selections for
inclusion in the album.
2. You can’t do recordings for more than one soundtrack release during
any one-year (or two-year) period of the term. Sometimes it’s an overall

limit, such as a maximum of three cuts over the term.
3. You can’t be late in delivery of product to your company at the time.
4. All the royalties and advances must be paid to your record company.
(Note that here we’re talking now about advances against your royalties,
as opposed to a fee that you may get for using your recording in the lm,
which we already discussed.) Just like the lm fee, when the company
gets your royalties and advances, it’ll want to keep 50% for releasing you
from the exclusivity and credit the other 50% to your royalty account.
If the soundtrack album is being released by your own company, you
should be able to get 100% of the monies credited to your account,
either to reduce your de cit, or to be paid out if you’re recouped. If you
really have a lot of bargaining power, you can get 50% or more of the
royalties paid to you even if you’re unrecouped. Your argument is that
the lm recording is in addition to the product they’re entitled to get
under your deal, and thus should be treated separately.
5. You must try to get the right to use the recording on one of your albums.
The lm company, if it gives these rights, will ask for a holdback period
before you can do it. (This is discussed on page 465.)
We’ll go deeper into these deals in Chapter 28, when you’ve got some more
concepts under your belt.
An interesting issue has come up around soundtrack albums in the
streaming age. Namely, if someone streams a single song, does the money go to
your label or to the label distributing the soundtrack album? I’ll give you the
answer later (on page 460 if you want to cheat and look ahead).

Streaming, TV, and Radio Broadcasts
There are four avors of streaming/broadcast rights that are swept up by your
exclusivity clause:
1. On-demand streaming of audio and/or videos on the Internet (Spotify,
Apple Music, Amazon Music, YouTube, TikTok, Vevo, etc.; see page

240);
2. Non-interactive streaming (see page 239);
3. TV, radio, and lm appearances; and
4. Streaming of your concerts.
Numbers 1 and 2 are not surprises. Those are the company’s primary business;
they obviously need these rights.
Numbers 3 and 4, however, snag artists who aren’t careful, because these
uses don’t feel like they have anything to do with “records.” But remember,
under your contract, a “record” is any reproduction of sound and/or video, and
these uses are “electronic transmissions” (see page 139 for the de nition of
those). Which means your record company has the exclusive rights. Which
means, if you want to do any kind of broadcast or streaming, you have to go to
your label (a) to get their permission, and (b) if they say okay, pay them a chunk.
If you’re doing a purely promotional radio or TV appearance (Saturday
Night Live, Howard Stern, Jimmy Kimmel, etc.), your label will want to be in
the loop but won’t get in the way—in fact, they usually help set these up. Their
major concern is the afterlife of those performances, such as on-demand
streaming. Because artists are so regularly on these shows, the major labels have
standard contracts with the TV producers concerning these rights, so it’s rarely
a fuss. The usual deal lets the TV show stream your performance as part of the
show, but not apart from it. They may also limit the amount of time that the
show can make your performance available online.
For concert webcasts, which have become very common for festivals, things
get more intense. Superstars may be able to pre-negotiate some very narrow
exceptions, but record companies have become increasingly touchy in recent
years. They view concert streams of your performances as competitive with
their streaming of your music. Meaning they want to get paid.
This is usually worked out by the promoter sliding money to the record
company. The deals are negotiated case by case, though if it’s a big enough
festival and they regularly do business with your label, the promoter may do an
overall deal that covers the label’s roster.

Re-recording Restrictions
All contracts say you can’t re-record any song you recorded during the term of a
deal for a certain period of time after the term. This is known as a re-recording
restriction. When you think about it, it’s perfectly logical—without it, you
could go out the day after your deal is over and duplicate your recordings for
somebody else.
The usual restriction period is ve years from the date of recording, but with
a minimum of three to ve years after the end of the term. The minimum keeps
you from re-recording an album delivered in the rst year of a six-year deal
immediately after the term, even though it’s been more than ve years since you
recorded it. While the ve years from recording is pretty much carved in stone,
you can sometimes get the period after the term down to two or three years, but
this has gotten harder lately. Some companies also add a period beyond this date
(seven years, or sometimes less) during which you can’t re-record more than
four songs on any one record.
Trivia Fun Fact: The world’s record for re-recording restrictions belongs to
Decca Records, who structured a deal under which Bing Crosby had a
perpetual re-recording restriction for the song “White Christmas.”
In the early days of the business, re-recording restrictions applied only to
“records,” and those were de ned as audio-only consumer products. Which
meant there was no restriction on re-recording for motion pictures,
commercials, etc. So a lot of classic artists started re-recording songs and
licensing those re-records for movies and commercials. That way, they got to
keep all the money (instead of letting the record company get a chunk by issuing
a sync license for the original recording). And in a very high-pro le example,
Taylor Swift re-recorded her earlier recordings not just for syncs, but to
distribute like any other product.
So re-recording restrictions have gotten a lot tougher over the last few years.
They look like this:
1. As we’ve discussed, the companies expanded the de nition of “record”
to include everything imaginable, so you can’t re-record for any purpose

during the restrictive period.
2. Many companies now say you can never re-record your songs to sound
just like the recordings you’ve given them, whether it’s for records,
commercials, or any other purpose. In other words, even after your rerecording restriction expires, you can only record a wholly di erent
arrangement of the songs.
Another side e ect (along with possible nausea and vomiting) is that this
dragnet also picks up your performances after the term of your record deal on
television and concert webcasts. In other words, you can’t go on TV or allow a
festival performance to be streamed if you perform any song that’s under a rerecording restriction, even though your deal is over. If you know enough to
ask, you can usually carve out TV and concert webcasts. I strongly suggest you
do this. It’ll be hard to do a festival show without your old songs, unless you
want the audience to spend a lot of time in the bathroom.

Guest Artists and Featured Artists
Isn’t it nice how superstars seem to be featured on each other’s records, even if
they’re signed to di erent labels? Now that you’re educated, don’t you wonder
how this is possible? Doesn’t it violate the exclusivity provisions of the
superstar’s agreement when they sing with their pals on another label?
The answer is yes, it violates their exclusivity.
We discussed the artist deals for featured performances on page 152, but
because of your exclusivity, the two record companies also have to make a deal
with each other before this can happen. You won’t be directly involved in the
deal, but if they get into a ght, no one can use the track. So you should
understand the principles in case you or your manager need to referee (or
bludgeon).
Assuming everyone is cool with going ahead, it’s handled with an override
royalty to the guest artist’s label, or if the guest artist is really big, there may be a
pro t share between the labels. The deals vary from situation to situation,

depending on the bargaining power, stature of the artists, and whether the
labels are getting along with each other at the time.

Side-Artist Performances
A related topic is non-featured performances, where you appear on someone
else’s record as a background singer, or playing an instrument without singing.
These appearances are known as side-artist performances. (They were
historically called sideman performances, and still are by some folks, but I’m
sure you agree that term is past its sell-by date. So let’s put a nail in it.)
Side-artist performances also violate the label’s exclusivity, but there’s a
strong custom in the industry (and you can usually add a provision to your
contract just by asking) that allows you to do it on the following kinds of
conditions:
1. The performance has to be truly a background performance, without
any solos, duets, or “stepping out.”
2. You can’t have a “featured” credit; you can only be credited in the liner
notes (those things inside physical records that list the producers,
musicians, and yoga instructors).
3. Your exclusive company must get a “courtesy credit” in the form of
“[Artist] appears courtesy of ____________ Records.” (Before I started
in the music biz, I always thought they did that just to be nice.)
4. You can’t violate your re-recording restriction (see page 178), even as a
background performer.
5. If you’re a group, no more than two of you can perform together on any
particular session. That’s because your record company doesn’t want
your distinctive sound showing up on another label.
6. Some companies require you to get the other artist’s label to give up a
side-artist clearance in exchange for letting you go (sort of like a future
draft pick).

Unless it’s carved out of your contract, meaning you don’t need your label’s
permission, the labels clear side-artist rights with each other by exchanging
emails (rather than doing a formal contract). This is usually a “rubber stamp”
process, unless one company is having a ght with the other about something
unrelated to the side artist. But that’s rare. After all, if one of the companies
makes an issue of it, they won’t have such an easy go when the other company’s
artist shows up as a side artist on their label. The process is something like
porcupines dancing carefully with each other.

WEBSITES/SOCIAL MEDIA
Back when websites were strange and unknown creatures, the companies
registered the website names of all their artists without bothering to ask. And
without regard to the fact that most of their record deals, which were made
before websites existed, probably didn’t give them the right to do this.
After the predictable shouting, gouging, and ve- nger death blows, most
deals now provide that, during the term, the company will have the exclusive
right to set up the artist’s website. The label will also want to control, or at least
have input on, your social media. Their argument is that they want to present a
coordinated marketing campaign across all platforms and, oh by the way, we’re
the big record company and you’re not.
You can’t really do away with their website rights without massive clout, but
you should be able to limit them to one website. If you don’t say this, their form
contract will give them the right to multiple sites. If they agree, they will also
want to have an artist section on their company website, which is ne. You
should ask for approval of the look, feel, and content of your section of the
company website. After the term, all the website rights should go back to you,
although they’ll keep the right to have you on their company website. The
contract usually requires you to give the company written notice before they
fork over your site. Don’t forget. Also, you should ask for the right to continue
using their recordings on your website after the term.
Some companies, if you ask, will allow the artist to set up an “uno cial”
website during the term. You should ask the company to let you use your

recordings on that as well, but this takes some clout to pull o .
Some companies also want to control your social media. You can usually
exclude this, based on the argument that your fans believe it’s you—whatever is
posted re ects on your overall image and therefore has to be authentic. Also, it
should re ect your core values; not the values of some marketing exec who
collects vintage bongs.
But even when you exclude it and do your own, the label won’t let you post
music on social media. Also, they’ll want access to your social media to promote
your records and gather data.
Some companies want to recoup the costs of creating and maintaining the
artist’s website and social media, but you should push back and say that it’s a
marketing expense (marketing expenses aren’t customarily recoupable).
Generally, they only want to charge you if they hire outside rms to help create
the site, and that’s rare. Most of the majors have inhouse folks to do the
websites. If they do charge you, try to limit the amount they can recoup to
items you’ve approved, and a cap of, say, $25,000 over the life of the deal.

SINGLE-SONG VIDEOS
Single-song videos are the ones you see on YouTube, Vevo, and the like. Even
though they’re monetized these days, they’re sometimes called promotional
videos, because historically they were just marketing tools that lost money.

History
Did you know that music videos (which only became popular in the United
States when MTV started in 1981) have been around since the 1960s in
Europe? They were invented because it was cheaper for artists to make videos
than to tour Europe. But videos have an even longer history than that. There
are some great treasures that came from something called a “Scopitone”
(pronounced “scope-ih-tone”). This was a jukebox that played “videos” on
16mm lm, and it enjoyed a brief life in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Today
the Scopitone lms are collectors’ items, and they include a number of color

videos from such artists as Sonny and Cher, Neil Sedaka, Dion, Nat King Cole,
Bobby Darin, etc. And if you really want to delve into the past, there are blackand-white “videos” that were shown in cinemas in the 1940s and 1950s, with
such artists as Fats Waller, Louis Jordan, Lena Horne, Bing Crosby, Spike Jones,
and many others.
But back to this century.
The video issues in your contract are:

Is the Company Going to Make a Video?
This is the rst question, because if the answer is no, there’s not much else to
talk about. Until you have quite a bit of bargaining power, the record company,
totally by itself, decides whether or not to make a video. As your bargaining
power increases, you can require the company to do one or two videos per
album.

Creative Control
Creative control over the content of videos is very limited. Companies don’t
want to spend $50,000 for a video, then have you say the “vibes” don’t hit you
right, leaving them stuck with a turkey they can’t monetize. So if they give you
any approval rights, it’ll usually be a bare-bones approval of the story, director,
and maybe producer. If you have serious bargaining power, you may be able to
get approval of all elements, including the nal edit. Some superstars even take
over control of making the video.

Recoupment
Historically there was a separation of video recoupment, but now everything
goes into one big pot with your audio account. The only exception is a full
concert-type video, which would be an entirely separate deal.

Budget

Budgets for shooting a video are typically designated or approved by the
company. As your stature grows, you may be able to put in a minimum budget
amount. The cost of videos has dropped radically over the years, and most are in
the $15,000 to $50,000 range. A real superstar video can cost up to $400,000 or
more, some as high as $1 million plus, but videos over $250,000 are rare.
Once a video budget has been approved, record companies get very touchy
about your running over the limit. Sometimes they atly refuse to pay, and the
artist (only superstars can a ord this “luxury”) actually writes a check. Other
times they grudgingly, grumblingly, bitchingly pay the excess, but they charge it
against anything they can grab—like future advances, sometimes even
songwriting monies, etc.
For some artists, sponsors will pay money to have their product included in a
video (called product placement). It’s up to your own personal Cheese-OMeter to decide if you’re willing to hold a soft drink while you’re hang-gliding.
But if you are, the placement dollars can o set a lot (and sometimes all) of the
video costs. Keep this in mind if your record company is being stingy about
video costs and you have an overall brand partner who might be willing to fork
over a few bucks in exchange for product placement in your video.

INDEPENDENT PROMOTION AND RADIO
CONCERTS
There are a group of folks in the business who do independent promotion.
Promotion people (as noted on page 70) get records played on the radio, and
they have relationships with station programmers.
Some of these promotion people are independent of the record companies.
Meaning they work for themselves and are hired by the companies on a projectby-project basis. They’re cleverly called independents, to distinguish them
from record company employees who do promotion.
For their services the independents are paid handsomely by a record
company (in most cases) or by the artist (in others). And by handsomely, I mean
the costs for multiformat promotion (meaning top 40, Alternative, Hot AC
[Adult Contemporary], AAA [Adult Album Alternative], Rhythm, or Urban)

can run $75,000 to $400,000 per single. (By the way, as high as those numbers
sound, they’re less than they were at their peak.) A bit of history…
It’s illegal to pay a broadcaster to play music in the United States (at least
without disclosing they’re being paid), and from time to time the government
put pressure on independents, going back to the 1980s. When Eliot Spitzer was
the attorney general of New York State (and before his hot nights with various
ladies, or at least before that became public), he launched a probe into the
record companies’ promotion practices. In response, the companies cut back on
independent promotion, and consequently the promotion prices came down.
Today, as we discussed, radio is much less signi cant than it was in the past.
It’s mostly seen as an enhancer of streaming, but it can be important for that. So
there’s still a need for independents.
There’s an art to hitting radio at exactly the right time. Before radio will play
any music, they do something called call-out research. Historically that meant
they called folks and played songs over the phone, but today it’s done by email.
The researchers ask if the consumers like a song, and if they get a lot of yesses,
radio gets behind it. If not (or even worse, if the listener says it’s “unfamiliar”),
radio is on to the next. So before going to radio, the labels want a buzz on the
Net because that ups the likelihood that people will know a song and like it. But
you can’t wait too long for the buzz to build—if you go to radio too late, and
your song is on the decline, radio thinks they “missed it” and they won’t climb
on a sinking ship.
Another form of promotion is what’s known as radio-promoted concerts.
Those of you in the bigger cities have seen local radio stations promote gigantic
concerts with all kinds of big-name acts (for example, Jingle Ball). Independent
promo folks have relationships with the stations, and they often broker deals for
artists to do these shows. You probably didn’t know that these acts are paid
much less than their normal fees (or maybe no fee, just a reimbursement of
their costs) to show up. They do it to generate goodwill with the radio station
(which makes a large pro t on these concerts), in exchange for the hope that
these stations will play the artist’s music. In essence, the artists are paying for
promotion of their recordings by cutting their fees.

For streaming, promotion is a di erent game, though based on similar ideas.
With a hundred thousand new tracks uploaded daily, breaking through the
noise requires a bulldozer on rocket fuel. Some independent promotion folks
have relationships with the curators of the playlists, and can at least get you
noticed. Whether the curators like your record enough to put it on a playlist is a
di erent story, but you actually have a few bites at the apple (no pun intended).
For example, Spotify has New Music Friday, which covers all genres. You can
only be on it the rst week of release. If you get on, you’re a step ahead,
particularly if you’re far enough up the list for people to notice. If you can’t get
on New Music Friday, then the promotion folks work the genre-speci c
playlists (rap, rock, pop, etc.) and try to build a buzz that spreads, just like we
discussed with radio formats. But in the end, viral success is driven by
algorithms, and so far, no one has gured out how to game that system. There
are apparently some shady bots that can drive your music for a week or two, but
then it falls apart.
Whatever the company spends on independent promotion will be 50% to
100% recoupable from your royalties. It’s worth ghting to keep the company
from recouping more than 50% of independent promotion costs. If they’re
charging 100% to you, they don’t have the same incentive to reduce spending as
they do when 50% comes out of their own pocket.
But as I said at the outset, all this is becoming less relevant because radio is
primarily important as a driver of streaming. And in the end, all anyone can do
is help your music get noticed; after that, it either catches re or it’s stomped out
by Smokey the Bear.

MERCHANDISING RIGHTS
Some record companies want to take artists’ merchandising rights, also
known as merch rights. These are the rights to put your name on T-shirts,
posters, etc., and we’ll discuss them in detail in Chapters 24 and 25. (Note: I’m
not talking about the rights to put out promotional posters, promotional Tshirts, etc., which are distributed free as a way of marketing your records, and
for which all record companies have the rights. This section is about record

companies who want the right to sell your merchandise at concerts, in stores,
etc.)
Most, if not all, companies will want the right to merchandise one image
(usually your album cover). Try to resist this, or at least keep the right to
merchandise the album cover for yourself and give them another image.
Other companies want even more images but will limit their rights to
merchandise sales on their website. If you agree to any of these, try to get a
decent royalty (see Chapters 24 and 25 for the royalty range). This should be
separate from your record royalty account, so they can’t use merchandise
monies to recoup your advances. Also, make sure they can only sell this stu on
their website, maybe in retail stores if they push. It’s worth trying to limit them
to online only, so you can be the only one o ering your merchandise in
physical retail stores.
Some companies also try to grab app rights, and also digital merchandise.
App rights means the right to create an app based on you. Many labels want
to control these rights, and you don’t want them to. If the app uses your
recordings, they’ll have to be involved because you’ll need a license for the
music. But they try to get these rights even if you aren’t using music in the app.
So push back.
Digital merchandise means digital use of your image. Historically, this
meant things like wallpaper (which means the background on a mobile device
or computer desktop) and voice tones (a recording of your speaking voice that
plays through a cell phone, saying things like, “Yo, my main man ain’t here”).
Today, voicetones are essentially meaningless, and wallpaper not far behind.
The biggest area is virtual merchandise like the skins and T-shirts we discussed
on page 159, namely decorating your avatar in a virtual game, or maybe
hanging a virtual poster in your virtual crib. I’m told companies are putting
some real resources into this area as the Web3/metaverse grows, but at the
moment it’s primarily the gaming world and you should try to hold onto these
rights.

TOUR SUPPORT

And now for a bit of my personal nances. When I was a kid, I had a soft drink
stand (there’s a picture of it in the Appendix on page 508). Here’s that
summer’s take: 250 drinks, at 5¢ each, equals $12.50. Not bad for sweating in
the sun for seven days a week over ten weeks, eh? But here’s the real coup: I
convinced my mother to pay for the drinks, so it was all proﬁt. (I hope you’re
impressed.) If she hadn’t, the drinks would have cost me $6.25, and the lumber
for the stand was $11. So the expenses were $17.25, and I took in $12.50,
resulting in a loss of $4.75. If it hadn’t been for Ma, I’d have had to le for
bankruptcy.
This is not unlike the situation of a new band going on tour. As you’ll see
later (on page 389), it’s virtually impossible for a new artist to go on the road
and do anything besides lose money. Even assuming everyone in the band only
has a “share of pro ts,” and therefore you don’t have to pay salaries to the
musicians, you still have the costs of rehearsal, equipment, travel, hotels, agents,
managers, etc. And that’s more than most artists can earn in their baby stages.
Indeed, even by the time you’re midlevel, you’ll be doing well to break even on
the road.
So why would you ever tour under these circumstances? (As the joke goes, if
you buy widgets for $1 and sell them for 50¢, how do you make a pro t?
Answer: Volume.) The reason, of course, is to become better known, build a
fanbase, get more streams, play bigger concerts, and rocket yourself to stardom.
As we discussed, the goal in the music biz is to nd ways to reach fans, and
touring is still one of the most powerful. On top of that, being on the road
builds your performing skills. There are a lot of artists who explode on their rst
album (or single) but have a lousy live show because they haven’t spent time
getting their chops down.
So touring is a good thing. However, if you go out and lose money, who’s
going to pay for the loss? The answer is usually one of two possibilities: (1) a
rich relative, or (2) a record company. Guess which one happens more often.
Monies that record companies give you to make up tour losses are called
tour support. It’s de ned as the actual amount of your loss (you’ll be required
to give accountings to the company), but of course it has a maximum limit,
usually in the range of $50,000 to $100,000 per tour for a major record

company, and more like $10,000 to $15,000 for an independent label. When
arguing for 360 rights, the companies say they’ll be more generous with tour
support if you’re more generous with their share of touring income. Maybe
that’s true…
Many if not most record companies are reluctant to commit to any tour
support in your contract but are pretty good about doing it at the time of the
tour. If you can get it up front, it’s great to have; if you can’t, the amount of
your tour support will depend on how well your manager does the Tijuana
Two-Step. But even if you get a tour support guarantee in your contract, it’s
usually limited to the rst album. After that, you’ll hopefully be at the point
where you no longer need it, or you’ll need to come in and grovel.
Record companies have gotten pretty sophisticated about tour support. For
example, some companies won’t let you charge a management commission in
computing losses, on the theory that the manager shouldn’t get paid when
everyone else is losing money. Also, if you use any of the money to buy
equipment, the company sometimes tries to own the stu . Most importantly,
they ask for so many approvals of your deals and expenses that, if they decide
they don’t really want to pay your tour support, they can make things so
di cult that you’ll give up.
None of this stops them from wanting some active rights to your tours, such
as VIP ticketing packages (we’ll talk about what that means in the touring
section on page 389, but basically it’s higher-priced tickets along with other
goodies). Some labels want free tickets to your shows, and many of them want
the right to buy additional tickets before they go on sale to the public. You
should push back on all of these, especially if you’re not getting any tour
support. And at least try to limit their right to buy tickets to situations where
you’re doing a VIP package
You should control your free tickets because they can be used strategically to
move your career ahead, or if you don’t need them for that, you can put them
on sale. If your concerts sell out, giving the label free tickets at each show is
prime real estate, and giving them away as opposed to selling them is money out
of your pocket.

Tour support used to be nonrecoupable. For a while, the record companies
bought the argument that it was “promotion” of their records, and wrote it o
just like any other marketing expense. But those days have gone the way of
eight-track cartridges. Today, tour support is always 100% recoupable (if you
need it, your bargaining power ain’t so great).
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track, go to Chapter 14 on page 199. Experts,
read on…

TERRITORY
For U.S. artists in the new-to-midrange category (unless there’s a massive
bidding war), the territory of your recording agreement (meaning the
countries where your company can exclusively sell your records) is almost
always “the world.” In fact, the territory is usually de ned as “the universe,”
because some backroom lawyer worried that an artist might argue satellites
weren’t covered by a contract that only said “the world.”
This “universe” wording was the cause of one of my most bizarre
negotiations, as well as my initiation by re to the music business. I had only
been practicing entertainment law a few months when a label that my rm
represented signed a jazz artist named Sun Ra. This guy said he was a
reincarnated Egyptian, and he recorded records in the pyramids (for real).
Anyway, his lawyer called me up to say that it was unacceptable to grant the
universe, and that our territory must be limited to the Earth Zone. At rst I
thought he was kidding, so I said I would give him everything beyond our solar
system, and maybe Neptune, but that the moon and neighboring planets were
mine. I also asked if we had to pay him in Earth money. The lawyer, very
seriously, said this was not negotiable and would blow the deal. So I added
“satellites” to the territory of “the world” and caved in on the rest. (That lawyer
owes me one, especially if Elon Musk actually colonizes Mars.)
More routine negotiation of the territory comes at the superstar level, or
when the artist isn’t based in the United States. In these cases, the artist may

divide North America (United States and Canada, but sometimes including
Mexico) from the rest of the world, thus making two separate recording
agreements.
The advantages of this are:
1. The two territories aren’t cross-collateralized (meaning royalties you
earn in North America can’t be used to recoup advances and costs from
other territories, and vice versa); and
2. You can always get a higher royalty outside North America because
you’re eliminating the U.S. company’s share of it.
The disadvantages are:
1. The advances may be lower (because there is no cross-collateralization);
and
2. It’s a pain for an artist to deal with two record companies. Dealing with
two companies means “schmoozing” (hanging out) with two sets of
executives, but more importantly, it requires coordinating marketing
e orts (which means getting up very early in the morning, or staying up
very late at night, to call around the world). Also, the contracts for splitterritory deals are much more complex than worldwide deals, meaning
higher legal fees, as you have to do two contracts and also work out how
the two companies will share the costs of artwork, videos, etc. In
addition, if you audit your label (see page 173), which you almost always
do with success, it’s far more expensive to be auditing two companies.
3. Foreign labels want you to eat the cost of union per-record payments,
which isn’t the case with U.S. labels. This doesn’t mean anything to you,
because we haven’t yet covered that topic (we’ll get to it on page 193).
For now, just know it’s a chunk of change that shouldn’t come out of
your share.
In recent years, major companies have generally refused to sign you for
anything except the entire world. So territorial deals are getting harder to come
by. It’s a bit easier if you start with an overseas deal, then come back to the

United States and tell them you don’t have those other territories. However, if
you’re going to a major label overseas, more and more often they’re holding
rm for the world.
By the way, if you sign an overseas deal for the world, be sure to ask for
approval of the U.S. label that will distribute your records. And if you have
some clout, even in signing a U.S. deal you can sometimes get approval of the
label distributing in some key foreign territories like the UK or Australia or
Lichtenstein (maybe not the last one).

CREATIVE, MARKETING, AND OTHER CONTROLS
There are a number of controls you should ask for, some of which you may
actually get. These are:
1. Consent to the use of your recordings in commercials. Identifying you
with a product is a major use of your brand name. Moreover, the
product could be competitive with a deal you already have (for example,
Coke might use your recording in a commercial while you have an
overall endorsement deal with Pepsi). Also, you might not want to be
associated with a toilet bowl cleaner. (By the way, as we’ll get to later, if
you write all your songs, you can stop the commercials by refusing to
license the song.)
2. Consent to licensing your recordings for lms, television, video games,
and other audiovisual works.
3. Approval of your photographs, biographical materials, and other
artwork used in advertising and promotion (see the next section for
more detail on this).
4. Approval of using your recordings in samples (we’ll discuss samples in
detail on page 262, but basically it means incorporating your track into
somebody else’s recording).
5. Approval of any edits of your recordings.
6. Approval of sequencing, which means the order of your songs on the
album. In a streaming age, this is way less relevant, but physical and full-

album downloads are still alive, and full albums are a page on the
streaming service, so you should still ask for approval of the initial
sequence and any changes (called re-sequencing).
7. Consent to coupling and premiums (see page 170 for what those are),
but as we discussed, this is also becoming less relevant daily.
If you do get approvals, they may be limited to the term of your deal, and to
the United States. As your power grows, so do your territorial approvals, as well
as the ability to keep your consent rights after the term. As to foreign, if the label
agrees at all, they’ll probably just agree to instruct their foreign a liate to get
your consent. That means, as long as they’ve told them what to do, they’re not
on the hook if the foreigner goes rogue.
If you can’t get any approvals, at least try to get consultation rights (see the
next section for what those are).
And if all else fails, take some comfort in the fact that even with nothing in
your contract, as a practical matter, the labels are pretty good about asking your
consent for anything that’s important.

ARTWORK
By artwork I’m referring to album covers and the photos/artwork used in your
advertising and marketing campaign. At any level you can get some
involvement in your artwork, but you have to ask for it.
“Involvement” at lower levels means they tell you what they’re doing, then
go ahead and do it whether you like it or not. This process is called
consultation, which means they talk to you but don’t have to get your
approval. Consultation is actually more valuable than I’m making it sound,
because you can at least make your feelings known before the horse leaves the
starting gate, and many companies will actually listen to you.
The next step up is approval, which means you can approve artwork that
the company prepares. When you have approval rights, the company has to
please you or you can stop them from using it.

Top of the line is the right to create your own artwork, subject to the
company’s approval. You can get this as your bargaining power grows. If you’re
a superstar, the company’s only approval rights may be as to legalities, obscenity,
and other major grossness—otherwise it’s your show.
When you get the right to do your own artwork, the trick is to make sure
you have an adequate budget, or else your creative juices will be severely
hampered. So build in a set gure and escalate it over time (for in ation). I
hesitate to give you speci c gures because they may be out of date by the time
you read this, but as of now a normal (no particular frills) artwork budget is in
the range of $10,000 to $20,000, which is the most you’ll likely get
contractually. Major artists can sometimes get a minimum budget for
photography in addition to the artwork budget, but it varies so widely that I
can’t really give you a range. Just know that superstar photographers are really
expensive. And regardless of what’s in the contract, companies will usually
spend a reasonable amount for artwork because they know it’s a key part of the
marketing e ort. But they may charge the excess over budget against your
royalties.
You should ask for the right to use the artwork on your merchandise, but this
is really hard to get. As we discussed (on page 186), the company wants these
rights for their merchandise.
If you can get merch rights to the artwork, the company will ask for
something in exchange. Typical deals are that you have to reimburse all or part
of their costs, or maybe give them a participation in the proceeds from merch
using their artwork. But note: When the company hires a photographer,
particularly an expensive one, they just get the right to put the photos on the
album cover and to use them for advertising and marketing. Photographers
usually reserve all other rights, so even if the company lets you use the photos,
you’ll almost certainly have to pay the photographer for those rights as well.

UNION EXPLOITATION CHARGES
It’s important that you not be charged with any union payments based on the
exploitation (streaming, sales, etc.) of records. This is di erent from union

scale—see page 88 for what that is—paid for performances at recording sessions,
which has nothing to do with exploitations and is due even if the recordings are
never released. Session scale payments are always recoupable as a recording cost,
as we discussed.
Union exploitation costs are borne solely by U.S. record companies if you
have a royalty deal, but as I mentioned earlier, it’s di erent if you have a royalty
deal with a foreign label—those folks charge you for the union exploitation
payments by deducting them from your royalties. If you have a pro t share
deal, these payments are deducted as an expense in computing pro ts.
The most signi cant union charges are what the companies pay to the
American Federation of Musicians (AFM), which has three funds—the Special
Payment Fund (SPF), the Music Performance Trust Fund (MPTF), and the
Employer Pension Fund (EPF). This is for musicians (not singers—those are
covered by AFTRA, and we’ll talk about them in a minute). The AFM
contribution is 0.36% (meaning a little over a third of 1%) of worldwide audio
streaming receipts, subject to a ceiling of 0.55% of U.S. receipts and a oor of
0.50% of U.S. receipts. The AFM also gets a piece of digital downloads, which is
currently 0.55% of the wholesale price for each permanent download,
excluding the rst ten 10,000 units.
On physical, through some complex computations that are beyond your and
my pain tolerance, these payments total about 4.2¢ per physical album
(excluding the rst 25,000 units) for worldwide sales during the rst ve years
after release of the album. For sales during years six through ten after release,
only the SPF gets paid, which is about 3¢ per album. In addition, these rates
escalate after the rst 300,000 units, and again after 1 million units. (There’s no
payment for physical singles, which is very nice of the union since physical
singles don’t exist anymore.)
And what happens to the money once it goes to the union? The biggest
portion is paid every year by AFM SPF to studio musicians (people who get a
session fee for recording, but don’t get a royalty), and the balance goes to
royalty artists. If you’re a studio musician, you get a bigger piece for working
more hours, so be sure the producer or the contractor booking your session lls
out the AFM B-4 [session] Report Form properly and sends it to the record

label’s A&R Administration Department for approval so you get credit for
your hours and pension contribution.
If all this turns you on, you can get more even info from the AFM at
www.sound-recording.org.
For non-royalty singers (as opposed to musicians), AFTRA (which merged
with the Screen Actors Guild and is now called SAG-AFTRA) requires the
companies to pay 0.36% of worldwide audio streaming receipts, subject to a
ceiling of 0.55% of U.S. receipts and a oor of 0.50% of U.S. receipts. They also
pay .07% of their receipts on permanent downloads. Music videos get .55% of
receipts for the rst ten years after release, then .3% of receipts for the next ve
years.
Both unions get a share of money from the use of the recordings in video
games, consumer products (e.g., toys and greeting cards), and newer media,
such as apps, video games, podcasts, and webisodes. These payments go to the
SAG-AFTRA Industry Sound Recordings Distribution Fund (SRDF), and for
AFM, to the Sound Recording Special Payments Fund.
An additional fee goes to the Employer Pension Fund (EPF). The EPF
folks collect and distribute a share of streaming and some international revenue
to nonfeatured musicians and vocalists.
So as you can see, these babies add up to a chunk of change that shouldn’t be
charged to your royalty account as a recoupable cost. Make sure your deal says
they can’t.
Another union oddity is that each time a record company signs a new artist,
they’re required to pay SAG-AFTRA Health Plan a Special Minimum Roster
Payment for every vocalist in the group. That’s the good news. The bad news is
that if you want health insurance, SAG-AFTRA Health will bill you about
$375 per quarter for single coverage, with additional charges if you want to
cover a spouse or another family member (though this is way cheaper than you
could get anywhere else). The record companies are required to pay SAGAFTRA Health a stful of money to subsidize your insurance as long as you’re
on the active roster of the label and/or the label continues to exploit your
recordings.

Aside from these insurance payments, the record label pays SAG-AFTRA a
Schedule C contribution of 13% of your royalty earnings up to a cap of
$140,000 for an artist group consisting of one or two vocalists, which equals
$18,200 per artist group. For three or more vocalists, they pay 13% of the
royalty earnings up to a cap of $180,000 ($23,400) per artist group.
Finally, while not paid by the labels, the unions get 5% of the featured artist’s
share of SoundExchange monies, which is for the non-interactive webcasting,
satellite radio (e.g., Pandora, NPR, etc.) performance of recordings. We
touched on SoundExchange on page 135 with regard to producers, and we’ll
discuss it in more detail on page 328.

LOAN-OUT DEALS
Loan-Out Companies
As you get more successful, you may want a loan-out company. I mean,
everybody’s got one…
It’s called a loan-out because the company (not you) enters into the deals,
and “loans” your services to others for recording, concerts, etc. This is the entity
you see people naming with cute little phrases (two of my favorites are
“Disappearing, Inc.” and “I Want It All”). When tax laws changed a while back,
it became questionable whether it made sense to have a loan-out company,
though some more recent tax laws may have gone the other way. Be sure to get
tax advice for your speci c situation.
Even if you don’t need a loan-out for tax planning, however, this kind of
company can shield you from some kinds of liability if you get sued. For
example, if the loan-out company’s only assets are your record royalties, and
someone sues you over a record-related claim, they can only grab your record
money. Not your personal bank accounts, your songwriting income, your
stamp collection, etc. (Note I’m talking about your being sued by someone
other than the record company. Record companies gured this out a long time
ago, so under your record deal, they take the right to grab anything they can
nd, as we’ll discuss in a minute.) Also, a loan-out company doesn’t protect you

from someone who claims you ripped o their copyright because of some
technical legal reasons. (For the lawyers, it’s because copyright infringement is
in essence a tort committed by the artist or writer, so you can look past the loanout company.)
To determine whether or not a loan-out company is right for you, consult
your lawyer, accountant, and life coach.
By the way, I’m using the term company for simplicity. It’s usually an LLC
(a limited liability company, which is something that looks and smells like a
corporation, but is treated like a partnership for tax purposes), but it could also
be a corporation, a limited partnership, a partnership of corporations, a general
partnership (though this doesn’t have any limited liability), a cluster of worms,
etc. I’m going to use company to mean any of these.
Anyway, for record deals, here’s how it works: You sign an exclusive
recording contract with your own company, on a form that looks like a barebones record label deal. Then the record label signs a recording agreement with
your company, which agrees to supply your services to the label. It looks like
this:

Figure 6. Loan-out deal structure.

Inducement (Side) Letters
As you can see in the above chart, you have no direct deal with the record label.
So what’s to keep you from walking out on your own company (after all, you
could re yourself), then thumbing your nose at the record label? You
personally have no deal with the record label—only your bankrupt loan-out
company has a contract, and its secretary/treasurer is now in Uzbekistan with
the recordings.
Well, you know the labels won’t let that happen, so they have you sign
something known as an inducement letter or side letter. This is a piece of
paper which says that if your company doesn’t deliver your recordings to them,
you will deliver them directly to the record label. And you also personally
guarantee that, if your company doesn’t perform under the deal, you are
nancially responsible.
So the real picture looks like Figure 7.

Figure 7. Loan-out deal with side letter.

The side letter is an integral part of these deals. It’s like an emergency detour.
If the highway is ooded, the company sends a Jeep down a back road to haul
your ass back in.

Structure of Loan-Out Deals
Loan-out contracts are very similar to contracts directly between the record
company and artist (known as direct agreements), except that:
1. The parties, of course, are the record label and your company, instead of
the label and you;
2. Your company agrees to supply your services and recordings;
3. There are additional legal clauses, which are basically assurances that
your company has the right to your exclusive services, that it has the right
to deliver your recordings, etc.; and
4. You have to sign an inducement letter saying that if your loan-out tries
anything cute, you’ll perform directly for the record company, and
you’ll be nancially responsible for anything the loan-out company does
wrong.

14
Independent Production, Label, and
Distribution Deals

INDEPENDENT PRODUCTION AGREEMENTS
At the end of the last chapter, we discussed signing a deal with your own loanout. If instead you sign to an independent company that in turn makes a deal
with a record label, that’s called an independent production agreement. It’s
very much like a loan-out deal, except that someone else owns the company.
Let’s call the independent company the “production company” (not an
industry term), because it “produces” the recordings. Typically, the production
company is owned by a producer or other record mogul whose “magic ears”
have found you. The independent company then takes the rights it gets from
you and supplies them to a record label for distribution (let’s call it the
“distributor”). As we’ll see in a minute, the inducement letter under these deals
is even more critical.
There are two basic avors of production deals:
1. A single-artist deal is where the production company makes an
agreement with the distributor for one speci c artist. Of course, the
production company may have signed more than one artist; we’re
talking only about the deal between the production company and the
distributor.

2. A multi-artist deal, also called a label deal, is where the production
company agrees to supply the recordings of multiple artists to a
distributor. Many of these artists (or perhaps all of them) may have not
yet been signed by the production company.
As you can imagine, a multi-artist deal is way more complicated than a
single-artist deal. So let’s start with the simpler one.

Single-Artist Deals
A single-artist deal between an independent production company and a
distributor is basically the same as a deal between your own loan-out company
and a record label. However, because the production company isn’t owned by
the artist, there are a couple of signi cant di erences:
1. The deal between the artist and the production company is now a real,
arm’s-length record deal, as opposed to a deal the artist makes with
himself or herself. This means there is a true negotiation—i.e., a deal
made by parties who are at “arm’s length” from each other instead of
hugging—and the artist asks for the same kind of things he or she would
get from a record company, such as a guaranteed release, creative
approvals, etc. (When you sign to a production company, you should
also get some things that you don’t need from a record company, which
we’ll discuss in a minute.)
2. There is a real possibility that the artist can get into a ght with the
production company. This means it’s more likely that the record
company will exercise its rights under the inducement letter, and thus
the terms of the inducement letter are even more critical.
Why Do It? So why should an artist make a deal like this? Wouldn’t it be
better to have direct contact with your record company? Well, the answer is
“maybe.” A production deal has its pluses and minuses compared to a direct
deal, and whether it’s better for you depends on your speci c situation.
Here are the negatives:

1. The production company takes a chunk of the royalties and advances.
Traditionally, distributors paid independent production entities a higher
royalty than they paid in direct artist deals (by 1% to 2%) for precisely this
purpose, though these days almost all of these deals are a royalty to the
artist and a pro t share for the production company (we discussed how
pro t shares work on page 162). But however it’s whacked up, you still
get a lower royalty than you would under a direct deal, and this is
especially so when you’re successful and renegotiate your contract. The
reason is that, with success, the production company’s deal with the
record company “tops out.” In other words, there’s only so much a
record label will pay for you, and because the production company is
getting a chunk of it, you’ll get less than if you had a direct deal with the
distributor. In other words, with success, these deals create a lot of stress.
2. You lose a lot of control. First, the production company will be making
the deal with the distributor and may not even involve you in the
process. Meaning you don’t have a say in the terms of their deal, or even
a right to approve who the distributor will be. Second, once the deal is
done, it will be harder for you to coordinate marketing, promotion, etc.,
if you and your manager have no direct contact with the distributing
record company.
3. There may be problems auditing the distributor directly (see page 173
for what auditing is). The production company has the right to audit the
distributing record company, but you have no deal with the distributor
and therefore no right to audit. Distributors understandably don’t want
two di erent people (you and the production company) doing the same
audit, so you won’t be able to look at their books.
4. The production company might go south with your money.
On the positive side:
1. The production company may be owned by a person who really brings
something to the party. For example, there are production companies
owned by major producers who will only work with a new artist if the

artist signs to his or her company. Or the production company might be
owned by important managers, promotion people, or industry folks
with good track records (translation: they have a lot of clout and can
harass the major label way better than you can).
2. If they’re on a royalty (as opposed to a pro t split), you may be able to
get the same calculation of royalties as the production company
(meaning “at source” streaming rates, minimal foreign reductions, etc.).
If you’re a new artist and they’re an established company, this can be
more favorable than what you could get on your own. Or if they have a
pro t share, you may be able to get a piece of that, which is also better
than you could do on your own.
3. And I saved the best for last: Nobody else may want to sign you.
On balance, this is not your ideal choice (barring very unusual
circumstances, like a major producer), but it can be a desirable alternative to
ipping Big Macs.
Artist Deal Points. If you’re making a deal with a production company, in
addition to all the other items we talked about for record deals (advances,
approvals, etc.), you should get the following:
1. Rather than a royalty, ask for a percentage of the production company’s
receipts. Whether they have a royalty or a pro t share, they have more
bargaining power than you, so you want to ride on their piggyback.
They’ll o er you 50%, but with clout, you can get more, maybe up to
75%.
The production company will want you to pay the producer’s,
mixer’s, and any other royalties out of your share of monies, and also
will want to recoup all the costs from your share. You should push back
and say that all those things should come “o the top,” meaning the third
party royalties and costs are deducted before the split. In other words, the
production company is paying their share of these costs. For example,
suppose the production company gets $100,000 and there are $60,000

in costs. If the costs come from you, you get $50,000 (your half of the
$100,000) less $60,000, meaning you’re unrecouped and get zero. If the
costs come “o the top,” you deduct the $60,000 from the $100,000,
leaving $40,000, and your 50% share is $20,000.
2. Try to get direct accountings from the record company. This may or may
not be possible, depending on the production company’s own deal. Your
worry is similar to the situation we discussed on page 131, where we
talked about a producer being owed money by an artist when no
royalties were payable. In this case, the roles are reversed: You’re the one
due money, and the production company may not have any royalties
coming in. This can easily happen if your production company signs
several artists (as you’ll see in excruciating detail on page 205).
3. Ask for the right to approve the distributor (if one isn’t already in place),
and ideally the terms of the deal (the last one is much harder). At a
minimum, get consultation rights (meaning they have to tell you about
it before they make a decision, so that you can yell at them if you’re not
happy).
4. And, of course, don’t forget the points we discussed on page 121: You
should have the right to get out of your deal if the production company
doesn’t get a distribution deal with an approved distributor within a
certain period of time, or if that deal goes wonky and they can’t replace
it.
5. As we discussed, you have no right to audit the distributor. So ask for a
pro-rata share of any audit recoveries that the independent production
company gets. If they agree, and they should, it will be after deducting
the cost of the audits. A tricky aspect of this is that the audit may cover
things besides you (for example, other artists on the independent
company’s roster), and even trickier is the situation where your interests
and the company’s aren’t the same. For example, the audit might
uncover that the distributor overpaid you and shorted the production
company. This usually gets worked out with language to the e ect that
everyone will act reasonably when they allocate the audit recovery.

6. If the production company is also your manager, be very wary of any
360 rights. They’re already sharing in the other income, so they
shouldn’t get 360 on top.

Multi-Artist (Label) Deals
A multi-artist deal, as the name implies, is one where the production
company has a deal with a record company to sign and deliver a number of
artists. It is sometimes called a label deal, as nowadays the production company
usually has its own label or logo on the product. Sometimes, however, the
production company has no identi cation on the records, and the public
doesn’t even know they exist.
Let’s now jump to the other side of the table and assume you’re the
production company (c’mon; it’ll make you a better-rounded person). Here’s
what the deals look like.
Diﬀerences from Single-Artist Deals. A multi-artist deal between the
distributor and the production company looks a lot like a single-artist loan-out
deal, but:
1. In addition to paying a recording fund for each album, there is often an
overhead payment to the production company which is used to pay the
company’s rent, payroll, phone, light bills, etc. For bigger deals, there
may also be money for marketing, promotion, etc., and the distributor
might give the production company o ce space in their building
(though if the production company has an indie image, it may not want
to be in corporate o ces vibe-wise).
2. The term of the deal is usually two or three years rm, with the
distributor having options for additional one-, two-, or three-year
periods.
3. The number of artists the production company can sign, and whether
the distributor can approve these artists, is a matter of major negotiation.
A new production company will maybe get the right to sign one, two, or

three artists over the term, but a more established company may get to
sign one or two artists per year. The distributors want to approve the
artists before signing, but if you have a massive amount of bargaining
power, you may be able to negotiate (a) no approval (extremely di cult
today, and if you do get it, it might be only one artist per year); or (b)
some creative formula, like the right to sign one unapproved artist after
you’ve signed two approved artists. The right to sign an artist without
the company’s approval is called a put because you can “put it to” the
company and they have to take it.
By the way, getting the label’s approval isn’t as bad as it sounds. If you
force them to take an artist they don’t like, the company won’t put
resources behind it.
4. The minimum and maximum number of albums the production
company can deliver is also pre-negotiated, both in terms of the overall
number per year, and the number per artist Budget-wise, the distributor
doesn’t want you delivering more than one album per artist per year
without its consent, except in the hip-hop world, where the attitude is
Bring It On!
5. Speaking of albums, how about this great idea (see if you can nd the
history lesson): You’re a production company in the last year of your
deal with a distributor, and you suddenly have the opportunity to sign a
hot new artist. Six months before the end of your term, you deliver an
album and say, “Please make this lady into a superstar so that, six months
from now when my deal ends, I can (a) beat you to death in a
renegotiation, or (b) better yet, take her to another company, leaving
you with a gigantic de cit from my prior ops. That way I can take the
monies from this new artist and buy that little pig farm I’ve always
wanted.”
Sound too good to be true? Of course the deal will require you to
deliver a minimum number of albums for each artist—usually three or
four—even if the term is over. So your production company is free to
leave at the end of the term, but the artists have to stick around for a

while. (In essence, this means your deal expires for some artists and
continues for others.)
6. The recording funds for the artists are negotiated at the time of approval.
However, if you have a put (the right to require them to take an artist),
those funds are spelled out up front, generally in the range of $75,000 to
$150,000 per album unless you’ve got a lot of clout; then those gures
increase. To exceed these limits, you need the company’s consent on each
speci c deal. Note this means that if you have the chance to sign a major
artist, you have to sit down with the distributor and work out a special
arrangement. (Sometimes the production company and the distributor
are both bidding for the same artist. You can imagine, since the
distributor approves how much the production company can spend,
which one is likely to come out the winner. In this case, unless there’s a
personal relationship or some other good reason why the artist would
rather sign to you, you can pretty well kiss them o .)
7. It’s sometimes possible, although di cult, to get ownership of the
recordings under a label deal. Even in this situation, however, you may
not own the recordings during the term. So if you win this point, the
distributor may own the recordings and assign them back to you down
the road (usually seven to ten years after the term). The distributor will
insist on your being recouped before they’ll assign the recordings back,
and if not, they’ll want to extend the assignment date until you are. If
this is the case, you should get the right to pay back the unrecouped
de cit at any time during the extension, to trigger an immediate
reassignment.
Cross-collateralization. Remember our story about a producer being
entitled to royalties when the artist is unrecouped, and how the artist went
further in the hole with every success? (See page 131.) Well, when you get to a
multi-artist deal, this scenario gets to be a high-speed drilling rig. It’s entirely
possible (even easy) to have two or three real losers, together with one smash,
but not get any royalties because the record company is using the winner’s
royalties to recoup the losers’ de cit. Here’s an example:

Suppose a production company has signed three artists. Assume the
following (the numbers bear no relationship to reality; they’re just for easy
math):
Multiple-Artist Deal
All-in Royalty to Production Company:
Royalty to Artist A:
Royalty to Artist B:
Royalty to Artist C:
Recording Costs:

12%
10%
10%
10%
$60,000/album

Advance for Production Company’s Operations

$100,000

Earnings:

Artist A:

Album 1: Distributor
Gross
Album 2: Distributor
Gross
Album 1: Distributor
Gross
Album 2: Distributor
Gross
Album 1: Distributor
Gross
Album 2: Distributor
Gross

Artist B:

Artist C:

$300,000
$200,000
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$2,500,000

Under these assumptions, let’s look at everyone’s accounts:
Artist A’s Account with Production Company

Album 1

Charges
(Recording Costs)
– $60,000

Album 2

– $60,000

TOTAL

$120,000

Earnings
+ $30,000 (10% ×
$300,000)
+ $20,000 (10% ×
$200,000)
+ $50,000

Balance
– $30,000
– $40,000
– $70,000

Summary: Artist A is in the red (unrecouped) in the amount of $70,000 (the
$120,000 de cit less the $50,000 earnings), and is thus owed nothing.

Artist B’s Account with Production Entity

Album 1

Charges
(Recording Costs)
– $60,000

Album 2

– $60,000

TOTAL

–$120,000

Earnings
+ $10,000 (10% ×
$100,000)
+ $20,000 (10% ×
$200,000)
+ $30,000

Balance
– $50,000
– $40,000
– $90,000

Summary: Artist B is in the red (unrecouped) in the amount of $90,000 (the
$120,000 de cit less the $30,000 earnings), and is thus owed nothing.
Artist C’s Account with Production Company

Album 1

Charges
(Recording Costs)
– $60,000

Album 2

– $60,000

TOTAL

–$120,000

Earnings
+ $ 30,000 (10% ×
$300,000)
+ $250,000 (10% ×
$2,500,000)
+ $280,000

Balance
– $ 30,000
+ $190,000
+ $160,000

Summary: Artist C is in the black (and owed) $160,000 (the $280,000 earnings
less the $120,000 de cit).
Production Company’s Account with Record Company

Overhead
Artist A

Charges
– $100,000
– $120,000

Artist B

– $120,000

Artist C

– $120,000

TOTAL

–$460,000

Earnings
+ $ 60,000 (12% ×
$500,000)
+ $ 36,000 (12% ×
$300,000)
+ $336,000 (12% ×
$2,800,000)
+ $432,000

Balance
– $ 100,000
– $ 60,000
– $ 84,000
+ $ 216,000
–$ 28,000

Summary: The production company is in the red (unrecouped) $28,000 (the
$460,000 de cit less the $432,000 earnings), and is thus owed nothing.

Grand Summary

Artist A: Unrecouped and not entitled to royalties.
Artist B: Unrecouped and not entitled to royalties.
Artist C: Owed $160,000.
Production company: Owes Artist C $160,000, but is in the red $28,000 and
thus not entitled to royalties.
Owing $160,000 and having no royalties due you is certainly the fuzzy side
of the lollipop.
(By the way, if you have a pro t share instead of a royalty, you can get into
the same tailspin, but it’s far too complex a calculation to put in a chart. Trust
me on this one.)
So how do you get out of the box? Well, if you have enough clout, you make
the distributor pay the artists’ royalties without regard to cross-collateralization.
Thus, if you and Artists A and B are deeply unrecouped, but Artist C is
recouped, they’d have to pay Artist C’s royalties. In other words, they can’t
cross-collateralize any artist’s royalties with either your or any other artist’s
de cits.
If you don’t have enough bargaining power for this, then at minimum you
should require the distributor to pay the artists’ royalties and if you’re
unrecouped, treat these payments as additional advances against your share of
royalties or pro ts. In the above example, that would mean the record company
would advance the $160,000 owed to Artist C, and the production company
would then be $188,000 in the red (the $28,000 original de cit plus the
$160,000 paid to Artist C). You wouldn’t make any money under these
circumstances (until you have massive success and eventually recoup), but at
least you won’t be breaking your kids’ piggybanks to pay the artists.

JOINT VENTURES/PROFIT SHARE
A joint venture, which is also called a JV agreement or a pro t share
agreement, is the same as a single-artist or multi-artist label deal, except the
production company gets a pro t share instead of a royalty.

If you have a joint venture/pro t share label deal, the distribution fees often
run higher than the 15% to 20% we discussed on page 164 for computing artist
pro t shares. That’s because you will usually need the distributing label to
supply business a airs and royalty accounting to your artists, and to help with
sales, marketing, and promotion. For these various services, the label will charge
an overhead/services fee, and the more they supply, the higher this charge will
be. It can range anywhere from zero to (more commonly) 4% to 7% in addition
to the distribution fee. Often they simply combine the
distribution/overhead/services fee into an overall percentage (e.g., 27.5%).
As noted above, the label often funds your operations. For example, you
might get $100,000 per year for your overhead, sta , etc. The distributing
record company will of course want those monies back before they start sharing
with you. It’s a matter of negotiation whether these are charged “o the top” of
the venture (meaning deducted from gross receipts as another expense in
computing pro ts), or whether they’re charged solely against your share of the
pro ts. It’s clearly better for you if it’s o the top, because that means both sides
bear their respective percentage. In other words, if it’s a 50% pro t share, you
and the record company each eat 50% of the cost. But if it’s all taken out of your
share, you’re bearing 100%. So push for this.

DISTRIBUTION DEALS
If you are truly a record company in your own right, then this is the deal for
you. It gives you the most autonomy and control of your life, as well as the
highest pro t margin. This is the deal that true independent labels make. Under
these deals, you own the recordings and artist contracts, so you really can walk
away at the end with everything, including both the old and future albums. But
of course there’s a catch…
A distribution deal is exactly what it sounds like—the company agrees to
distribute the recordings for you, meaning they get your records into the
streaming and download services around the world, manufacture and
distribute physical goods, monitor all this, collect the money, and, oh yeah, pay
you. For this, they charge a distribution fee, which covers their company’s

overhead, operations, and pro t. The range of distribution fees under these
deals is 20% to 25% (unless you’re a really huge independent, then you can
squeeze it down), with the bulk of the deals 24% to 25%. So if the company
collects $100, they pay you $75 to $80.
In some of these deals, for an extra fee, the distributing company will help
with marketing, sales, and promotion. This is called a services fee, just like we
discussed in a joint venture, and it’s usually in the range of an extra 5% to 7% on
top of the distribution fee. It’s often done with a menu, so you need only take
what you want. For example, if you want sales, but not promotion, the fee
would be less.
Note these gures are higher than the distribution and services fees we
discussed in the pro t split section above. The reason is that the earlier gures
were simply a way to compute pro ts, so the company was getting the fee plus a
share of pro ts. Here the company pays you everything over and above these
fees.
A recent development is that you can now get a distribution deal for the
world. In the past, you could get a distribution deal for the U.S. but had to take
a royalty for other territories. Today, you can go worldwide at these skinny fees
(though sometimes the label’s percentage is higher for physical product).
And now for the catch: In these deals, you take on the entire nancial risk of
signing artists (meaning paying advances, recording costs, artwork, etc.) as well
as marketing the records. You also have to pay for your own overhead (sta
salaries, rent, lights, computers, feng shui, etc.), and you have to create
accounting statements and pay royalties due to the artists and songwriters. If
there are physical goods, you have to pay the manufacturing and shipping costs,
plus take the risk that the product might not sell and get returned to you (take a
look at the discussion of returns on page 84). If there are returns, you not only
get no money, but you’re also charged for the cost of manufacturing and
shipping the CDs. In other words, if your artists zzle like bad reworks, you’re
seriously out of pocket.
So a distribution deal is not for the weak-hearted. But with success, it’s by far
the best deal for you. Not only do you get most of the income, at the end of the
term you own the recordings, the artist contracts, and everything else.

These types of deals can be made at the highest level (for example,
Hollywood Records [Disney’s label] is distributed by Universal under such an
arrangement), down to small indie labels who make these deals with
independent distributors.

LABEL SERVICES DEALS
A relatively new animal is the label services deal, which is essentially a
distribution deal aimed at artists (rather than independent labels, though I’m
sure they would handle the right label as well). Under these deals, you own the
recordings and license them to the label service company, who acts as your
virtual record company and handles distribution, sales, marketing, and
promotion.
With these arrangements, however, they sometimes want the artist to pay for
recording, marketing, and promotion, and also to take the risk of physical
returns. For a known artist, or an artist with heat, the label service companies
often will front the money for creation of the record, marketing, and
promotion, and may even give you an in-pocket advance. But instead of taking
these costs o the top like a pro t share deal, they take the costs and advances
from your share of money.
The speci cs of label service deals are very customized, so I can’t give you
hard-and-fast rules, but in general it’s from 60/40 to 70/30 in favor of the artist,
sometimes even more. Some of these companies will do a 50/50 pro t share,
calculated as we discussed on page 163.
Just like a distribution deal, you can get this same percentage of your
worldwide earnings from a virtual label. That’s very di erent from normal
record deals, where your royalty is reduced in foreign territories (other than one
major that doesn’t reduce for foreign). And in the U.S. and abroad, your share
of the earnings is a much bigger percentage that you’d get as a royalty.

UPSTREAM DEALS

An upstream deal is a cross between an independent distribution deal and a
production deal. It works like this:
An independent label goes to an independent distributor that’s owned by a
major label. It makes a standard distribution deal but also gives the major label a
right to upstream the artist, meaning the deal miraculously transforms from a
distribution deal into a production deal with the major label. (Technically, the
upstream deal is made with the major label in the rst place. The major label
then “supplies” the independent distribution to the indie label. In other words,
the pure distribution part of the deal is in a contract with the major label, not a
separate contract with the independent distributor.)
When an artist is upstreamed, the distributing label moves the records from
the indie distributor to its major distributor. It stops paying the gross income
less a distribution fee, and instead pays the independent label a royalty, or more
commonly these days, a percentage of pro ts. Whether it’s a royalty or pro t
share, the independent gets less money than it would under a distribution deal.
That’s because the distributing label is now taking a much bigger risk. When it
upstreams, it takes over the cost of marketing, promotion, videos, returns, etc.
(all of which were the responsibility of the indie label under the distribution
deal).
The idea behind upstreaming is that, when an artist’s sales get to a certain
point, it takes the clout (and money) of a major to move those sales to the mega
level. Since the major labels aren’t willing to put out big marketing bucks if
they’re only getting a distribution fee, the deal transforms.
The upstream is usually at the discretion of the major label. Sometimes it’s
automatic, meaning it kicks in when an artist achieves a certain sales level, but
this is rare. Upstreaming is rarely at the independent label’s discretion, but if
you can’t get the right to force an upstream, you can sometimes get consent to
it happening.
The advantage of doing an upstream deal is basically time. If there is no
upstream deal in place, and an artist explodes, the indie has to run around and
make a deal with a major, which takes time and (when you change distributors)
it can cost you money in the confusion of instructing digital service providers to

pay someone else. If an upstream deal is already there, you can immediately
shift the project to the bigger system without loss of momentum.
The disadvantage is that the terms of the upstream deal are preset, so the
indie doesn’t have the clout of an exploding record to make a better deal when
they decide to upstream.

PART III

Songwriting and Music
Publishing

15
Copyright Basics

Before you can understand what songwriting and music publishing are all
about, you have to understand how copyrights work.
When you deal with something intangible like a copyright (which you can’t
see, feel, or smell), it’s a challenge to nail it down. Copyrights are a tremendous
amount of fun—they’re squiggly little critters that, every time you think you
have a handle on them, take an unexpected turn and nip you in the butt. And
many of the concepts have been around since record players had cranks on the
side, which makes for some interesting challenges in today’s world.

BASIC COPYRIGHT CONCEPTS
When you own a copyright, it’s like playing Monopoly and owning all the
properties on the board. But unlike Monopoly, you’re not limited to the rents
printed on the little cards. (Well, actually, there are some preset rents, but for the
most part you can charge whatever the tra c will bear.)

Deﬁnition of Copyright
The legal de nition of a copyright is “a limited duration monopoly.” Its
purpose (as stated in the U.S. Constitution, no less) is to promote the progress
of “useful arts” by giving creators exclusive rights to their works for a while. As
you can imagine, if you created something and everybody had the right to use it

without paying you, not very many people would go through the trouble of
creating anything (including you and me).

What’s Copyrightable?
To be copyrightable, the work has to be original (not copied from something
else) and of su cient creativity to constitute a work, which is a pretty low
threshold.
There’s no speci c test to know what’s copyrightable; it’s decided on a caseby-case basis, and it has nothing to do with length. For example, the ve notes
played by the spaceship in Close Encounters of the Third Kind are copyrightable
because of their originality, even though they’re just ve notes. We’ll talk more
about this on page 330, in connection with copyright infringement cases.

How to Get a Copyright
Under U.S. copyright law, as soon as you make a tangible copy of something,
you have a copyright. Tangible means something you can touch, though that
has been clari ed in the Copyright Act to mean something that can be
“perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the
aid of a machine or device.” That phrase is how the government uses sixteen
words to say “electronic les.”
If the work is a musical composition, for example, it can simply be recorded.
Once this tangible copy exists, you have all the copyright you need.
Many people think you have to register in Washington to get a copyright.
Not true. There are some important rights you get from registering, but
securing a copyright isn’t one of them. (More on this later.)
So it’s that simple. If you sing a song in your head, no matter how
completely it’s composed, you have no copyright. Once you write it down or
record it, you have one. If you’d like to take a few minutes right now and
copyright something, I’ll wait.

WHAT ARE ALL THESE RIGHTS YOU GET?

When you have a copyright, you get the following rights at no extra charge.
These rights are exclusive, which means that no one can do these things without
your permission. (For you technical freaks, the rights are listed in Section 106 of
the Copyright Act.)
You get the exclusive right to:
1. Reproduce the work.
For example, if you write a song, no one can record it, publish it as sheet
music, put it in a movie, or otherwise copy it without your permission.
(Actually, there are some exceptions, but we’ll get to those in a minute.)
2. Distribute copies of the work.
Apart from the right to reproduce your song, you also control a separate
right of distribution. Notice the di erence between making a copy of
the work (like recording a song), which is one use of a copyright (it’s a
reproduction, as we discussed in point 1), and the distribution of this
copy (streaming to the public, for example), which is another, separate
right.
3. Perform the work publicly.
With a song, this means playing it in concert venues, on the radio, on
television, through a streaming service (which is also a distribution, as we
just discussed), in bars, amusement parks, supermarkets, elevators (you
know your career is either soaring or history when you hear your song in
an elevator), or anywhere else music is heard publicly. It doesn’t matter
whether the performance is live or recorded; you get to control this
right. (If you’re wondering how you could ever police this or get paid,
stay tuned.)
4. Make a derivative work.
A derivative work is a creation based on another work. In the music
industry, an example is a parody lyric set to a well-known song (what
Weird Al Yankovic does). The original melody is a copyrighted original
work, and once you add parody lyrics, it constitutes a new, separate
work. This new work is called a derivative work because it’s “derived”

from the original. Another example is a song with a sample in it, or an
original arrangement or remix of a well-known song.
This concept is even easier to see in other areas. Any lm made from a
novel is a derivative work (the novel is the original work). Another
example is the Broadway musical Rent, which is a derivative work of the
opera La Bohème. Anyway, you get the idea. (By the way, the original
doesn’t have to be copyrighted. La Bohème is so old that its copyright
long ago expired; ditto for all the Cinderella-based movies. But in these
cases, the only parts of the derivative work that are protected by
copyright are the newly created ones.)
5. Display the work publicly.
Generally, this gives you the exclusive the right to put things like
paintings and statues on public display. In the music area, about the only
thing it covers are websites that display lyrics, which is also a distribution.

EXCEPTIONS TO THE COPYRIGHT MONOPOLY
As I said earlier, the copyright law gives you an absolute monopoly, which
means it’s your bat and ball, and you don’t have to let anyone else play. If you
want to write poems and throw them into the sea, so that no human being can
ever see them, that’s your prerogative. You may be poor in your old age, but
you’ll have entertained a lot of sh.
However…

Compulsory Licenses
There are ve major exceptions to this monopoly rule, and they’re known as
compulsory licenses. A compulsory license means that you must issue a license
to someone who wants to use your work, whether you like it or not. The ve
compulsory licenses are:
1. Cable television rebroadcast.

Not really relevant to music; it’s about cable TV companies retransmitting over-the-air TV stations.
2. Public Broadcasting System.
The PBS lobbyists did a terri c job of requiring copyright owners to
license works to them at cheap rates.
3. Jukeboxes.
It may surprise you to know that until the 1976 Copyright Act,
jukeboxes paid nothing for the right to use music. They were considered
“toys” in the 1909 Copyright Act (really). Now they pay set license fees,
the details of which have never been relevant to me, so I don’t know
them.
4. Digital performance of records.
This baby was added in 1995, then modi ed in 1998, and it requires the
owners of recordings to allow performances of their recordings on
digital radio, which also includes non-interactive streaming (radio shows
on the Internet). We will talk a little about this on page 326, and we’ll hit
it harder on page 327.
5. The use of non-dramatic musical compositions in streaming,
digital downloads, and phonorecords.
This last one is the most used in the music business, so we’ll do a deeper dive.
It’s called a compulsory mechanical license. And it’s recently been pumped
up on steroids by something called the Music Modernization Act, or MMA,
which we’ll also cover.

COMPULSORY MECHANICAL LICENSES
To understand what the hell I’m talking about, you rst need to know about
mechanical royalties.

Mechanical Royalties

The term mechanical royalties (or mechanicals to its friends) developed in the
1909 Copyright Act and referred to payments for devices “serving to
mechanically reproduce sound.” Even though devices haven’t reproduced
sound “mechanically” since the 1940s, the name has stuck and the monies paid
to copyright owners for the manufacture and distribution of records are still
called mechanical royalties. The rights to reproduce songs in records are known
as mechanical rights.
The concept of a compulsory license for these mechanical rights grew out of a
concern in Congress that the music industry was going to develop into a
gigantic monopoly. This desire to keep copyright owners from controlling the
world resulted in the compulsory license for records, which accomplishes its
mission nicely.
Let’s take a closer look:

Compulsory Mechanical Licenses
The compulsory copyright license for records is in Section 115 of the Copyright
Act. Until 2018, when the Music Modernization Act (MMA) was passed, it
only dealt with traditional sales of physical product and digital downloads.
Because of the MMA, however, it now deals with interactive streaming as well.
The streaming compulsory license gets a bit complicated, so let me rst give you
the parts of mechanical licensing that didn’t change under the MMA. Then I’ll
let you know what your tax dollars have been up to.
Section 115 says that, once a song has been recorded and released to the
public, (a) the copyright owner must license the song (i.e., they have to issue a
compulsory mechanical license) to anyone else that wants to use it in a
phonorecord (which is a de ned term in the Copyright Act, and I’ll explain it
in a minute); and (b) that license can only charge a speci c payment established
by the law (more on this later). In other words, if you can’t (or don’t want to)
get a voluntary license (meaning a license where you and the copyright owner
voluntarily agree on a deal), you can invoke the compulsory license section of
the Copyright Act, and the owner has to let you use the song in phonorecords
for a set price.

However, the owner is only required to issue a compulsory mechanical
license if:
1. The song is a non-dramatic musical work; and
2. It has been previously recorded; and
3. The previous recording has been distributed publicly in phonorecords;
and
4. The new recording (called a cover, or cover record, in the biz) doesn’t
change the basic melody or fundamental character of the song; and
5. The cover recording is only used in phonorecords distributed to the
public for private use.
All of these conditions have to exist before you get a compulsory license. If you
miss one, you have to beg the publisher for a license, and she can say, “Buzz
o .”
Let’s look at the conditions for the compulsory license:
Non-dramatic Musical Work. Before you can get a compulsory license, the
song must be a non-dramatic musical composition. It’s not clear what a
“dramatic” musical composition is, but it’s probably a song used in an opera or
musical—i.e., a song that helps tell a story.
Previously Recorded. You can’t get a compulsory license for the very rst
recording of a song. The law allows the owner to control who gets it the rst
time, which is known as a rst use. Also, even if the song was previously
recorded, you can only get a compulsory license if that rst recording was
authorized by the copyright owner. The fact that someone sneaks o and
records the song doesn’t trigger the compulsory license, nor does a fan posting
your concert performance of an unreleased song.
Public Distribution. The rst recording must have been distributed to the
public. This closes a loophole from the prior law. So even if the copyright owner
allowed a recording to be made, if it was never released, you can’t get a
compulsory license for another recording.

Phonorecord Use. A compulsory license is available only for phonorecords,
which are de ned in the copyright law to mean audio-only recordings. This
de nition was the publishers’ nest lobbying accomplishment in the 1976
Copyright Act, because it excluded home video devices from the de nition of
phonorecords, and now it excludes video streaming. This means there’s no
compulsory license for audiovisual works, and, among other things, it means
that motion picture companies have to negotiate with every copyright owner
for audiovisual streaming of each song. It also means the song owners are free to
charge whatever rate they choose. (More on how this is done on page 225.)
No Major Changes. When you get a compulsory license, you’re allowed to
arrange the song “to conform it to the style or manner of interpretation of the
performance.” (This is in section 115(a)(2) of the copyright law, for you detailoriented folk.) However, you can’t change the basic melody or fundamental
character of the work. So, for example, you couldn’t write new lyrics, or add
another melody.
If the above conditions exist, then anyone who wants to use a song in
phonorecords or streaming can do it by ling certain notices and paying a set
fee called the statutory rate (it’s called a statutory rate because the rate is set by
the Copyright Act, and the Copyright Act is a “statute” [meaning a law]). For
physical and downloads, the statutory rate is currently the larger of (a) 12¢, or
(b) 2.31¢ per minute of playing time or a fraction thereof. Thus, if a song runs
ve minutes or less, the rate is 12¢. However, if it’s over ve minutes (even by a
second or two), but not over six minutes, the rate is 13.86¢ (2.31¢ × 6 =
13.86¢). If a song is over six minutes but not more than seven minutes, the rate
is 16.17¢ (2.31¢ × 7 = 16.17¢). You get the idea.
The above rates, which were e ective January 1, 2023, are also subject to
adjustment based on the consumer price index (CPI to its frat bros). The CPI
is that government report which tells you the shocking news that things are
getting more expensive.

For example, if the CPI goes up 10%, the rate would move from 12¢ to
13.2¢. So the more in ation we get, the more you get for your songs.
Wonderful news, except for the fact that you’ll have to use a lot of those
increases to pay for bananas at $40 a pound.
Ringtones (which are considered phonorecords under the compulsory
mechanical license provisions) have a separate statutory rate, which is currently
24¢. That’s obviously much higher than the 12¢ physical and download rate, for
historical reasons that I could give you, but since ringtones are essentially dead,
and it’s not all that interesting anyway, I won’t waste the ink (or electrons, if
you’re using an e-reader).

Music Modernization Act
In 2018, the MMA created a compulsory mechanical license for streaming.
And unlike the compulsory license for physical and downloads, you can get this
streaming license even if the recording hasn’t been previously released (i.e., it’s a
rst use and not a cover record). However, you can only get a streaming
compulsory license if (a) the recording of the song was authorized by the song
owner, and (b) the owner of the sound recording authorized digital
distribution.
Huh? If it’s already been authorized for recording and digital distribution by
the owner of the song and the recording, why would you need a compulsory
license? Don’t you have voluntary license?
The answer is actually pretty interesting, and it’s rooted in a massive war that
happened in the business. But we need a few more concepts under our belt
before I can explain it, so hang on until the next chapter (on page 240). Can
you feel the suspense building?
Streaming mechanicals are WAY more complicated than physical and
download mechanicals. Unlike the pennies in those prior examples, streaming
mechanicals are a percentage of streaming income, and not a simple calculation.
Also, these rights overlap with other rights we haven’t yet discussed. So sorry to
keep doing this, but please hang on for a few more concepts and we’ll tackle the
streaming mechanicals on page 238. I promise it’ll be worth the wait.

Probably…

Foreign Mechanicals
Other than the United States and Canada, most countries of the world use an
entirely di erent copyright royalty system for downloads and physical goods.
Mechanicals “over there” are a percentage of wholesale price, which covers all
songs on the record. This means the rate has nothing to do with the length of
the composition or even the number of songs. The same amount of
mechanicals is paid for an album containing eight compositions that is paid for
one with twelve. Also, as we’ll discuss later (on page 264), foreign mechanicals
are usually paid to a government-mandated agency.
For example, mechanicals for downloads and physical in the United
Kingdom are currently 8.5% of PPD (see page 83 for what PPD is), though
there are some complexities. If you’re curious, or a glutton for pain, take a look
at their website, www.prsformusic.com. Finding the details is a little like
navigating a Fortnite battle, but at the time of this writing you go to the home
page, click on Writers/Publishers, click on MCPS (standing for MechanicalCopyright Protection Society), look under “MCPS Royalty Sources,” and
knock yourself out.
The rate for physical and downloads in the rest of Europe is set by an
organization called BIEM (Bureau International des Sociétés Gérant les
Droits d’Enregistrement et de Reproduction Mécanique; is that a
mouthful, or what?). BIEM (pronounced “beam”) is a group of agencies in
each territory that collect mechanical royalties for their a liates. Currently, the
BIEM rate is 11% of PPD but they allow some deductions, so the net rate is
8.712% of PPD.
We’ll get to foreign streaming a bit later, after we talk U.S. steaming rates.

16
Publishing Companies and Major Income
Sources

PUBLISHING OVERVIEW
Now that you’re a maven on copyrights, understanding publishing is pretty
simple. It works like this:

What Does a Publisher Do?
As a songwriter, you may be interested in business, but your talents are best
spent in creating. However, someone needs to take care of business, and that’s
where the publishing industry came from.
A publisher makes the following speech to a songwriter:
“Sit down, kid. Nice shirt. You got great taste.”
The publisher leans forward, rattling the gold chains on his neck. “You’re a
smart guy, so you’ll get this right away. Your strength is writing songs, and mine
is taking care of business. So let’s make a deal: You assign the copyright in your
songs to me, and I’ll get people to use your songs. Then I’ll give ’em licenses,
make sure they pay up, and we split the dough. Simple, huh? Now sign this
perfectly standard agreement. Wanna cigar?”

Administration

Okay, so I’m being a smart aleck. But these principles are the basis of the
publishing business.
The rights the publisher just described— nding users, issuing licenses,
collecting money, and paying the writer—are known as administration
rights. When a publisher makes a publishing deal with a songwriter, it takes on
the obligation to do all these things, and thus “administers” the compositions.
In exchange, the writer signs over the copyright to the publisher (though, as
we’ll discuss in a bit, it’s now less common for writers to give up 100% of their
copyrights, or to give them up forever). The ow of rights looks like this:

Figure 8. Publishing industry structure.

Traditionally, the publisher split all income 50/50 with the writer (with the
exception of performance monies and sometimes sheet music, which we’ll
discuss later), though publishers today take much less. The publisher’s piece is to
cover its overhead (o ce, sta , etc.) and pro t. The share of money kept by the
publisher from each dollar is known by a sophisticated industry term: the
publisher’s share. The balance is just as imaginatively called the writer’s share
(see Figure 9).

Figure 9. “Publisher’s share” and “writer’s share.”

Publishers… From the Beginning of the Universe
Until Now
Following the turn of the twentieth century, and well into the 1940s, publishers
were the most powerful people in the music industry. (Ever heard of Tin Pan
Alley? That’s where the publishers’ o ces were located.) In the early days, most
singers didn’t write songs, so they (and their record companies) were at the
mercy of the publishers, who controlled the major songwriters. Remember, no
one can use a song for the rst time without the publisher’s permission (see page
220), so the publishers decided which artist was blessed with the right to record a
hot new ditty. On the writer side, because of the publishers’ connections to the
labels and artists, it was di cult, if not impossible, for songwriters to exploit
their works without a major publisher behind them.
Publishers today are still major players, but their role has changed radically.
At one end are “creative” publishers, in the sense that they put their writers
together with other writers, help them ne-tune their skills, and pitch their
songs to artists, lm companies, brands, etc. At the other end are publishers who
are basically banking operations—they compute how much they expect to earn
from a given deal, then pay a portion of it to get the rights. From these guys,
you can’t expect much more than a bet against your future income. And of
course there’s a rainbow in between.
While all of this is important in the beginning and middle stages of your
career, many of the major writers make very skinny deals with the publishers. In
other words, they use a publisher to handle the backroom chores of issuing
licenses and collecting money, while the writer keeps ownership of their

copyrights and the bulk of the money (we’ll discuss what those deals look like on
page 292). This is because, once a writer is well known, he or she can get to
artists as easily as a publisher can, and maybe easier (artists often call important
writers directly when they’re looking for material, or the writer may be a major
producer, and the artists they produce are always looking for songs). Also, more
and more artists are writing their own songs, so there’s no need for a publisher
to get songs to them. All they really need is someone to make sure they get paid
everything they’re owed.

Mechanics of Publishing
A publishing company has a lot fewer moving parts than a record company. (We
discussed record company anatomy on page 70.) To be a publisher, you only
need the following (and some of these functions can be performed by the same
person):
1. An administrator to take care of registering copyrights in the songs,
issuing licenses, collecting money, paying writers and co-publishers, etc.
2. A “song plugger” who runs around and convinces people to use the
songs, in particular for lms, TV, and commercials.
3. A creative sta person, who nds writers, works with them to improve
their skills, pairs them up creatively with co-writers, etc. If the publishing
company only owns an existing catalog of songs (in other words, it has
no writers currently under contract to deliver new songs), you don’t
even need this person.
Thus, unlike the record business, it only takes a small investment to call
yourself a publisher. You don’t need a large sta (until you get to be huge),
though as the digital world gets more complex, it takes a sophisticated system to
keep track of the billions of tiny transactions that generate money. So while it’s
not quite as simple as it used to be, publishers are still much smaller than record
companies.

Types of Publishers
For this reason, there are a lot of players in the publishing biz, and it isn’t nearly
so dominated by the majors as is the record business. There are, to be sure,
megaton publishing companies who have worldwide operations and generate
billions of dollars per year, but there are busloads of others running the gamut
from a one-person show to the giants. Here’s a broad-strokes view of the
di erent types:
The 900-Pound Gorillas. These are the major companies, such as Universal
Music, Sony/Music Publishing, and Warner Chappell (all of whom are a liated
with record companies). There are also slightly lighter-weight ( ve-hundredpound gorillas), such as Kobalt and BMG Rights.
Major Aﬃliates. There are a number of independent publishing companies,
with full sta s of professionals, whose “administration” is handled by a major.
The publisher’s a liation with a major may be for the world, or it may be for
only certain territories. For instance, a publisher might be a liated with a major
for the United States and have separate deals (with other publishers) for the rest
of the world.
Stand-Alones. Stand-alone isn’t an industry term; I’m using it to mean a
company that’s not a liated with a major, and instead does its own
administration. In other words, it collects its own money, does its own
accountings, etc. It usually licenses territories outside the United States to a
major or an independent player in that market, though it can have o ces in
some territories.
Just because the publishing game has a low entry price doesn’t mean it’s an
easy gig. The di erence between a good publisher and an unquali ed one can
mean a lot to your pocketbook. For example, a good publisher knows how
much to charge for various licenses and where to look for hidden monies (for
example, see page 270, discussing how foreign monies get lost when they’re not
properly claimed). The bad ones can lose money just by sitting there and not
doing what they’re supposed to. An inexperienced publisher that’s a liated

with a major publisher is a quantum improvement over an unquali ed
publisher trying to go it alone. However, the major will not have the same
incentive to take care of the independent’s songs as it will to take care of its own.
Also, a major may administer millions of copyrights, so you can get shoved to
the back of the shelf. On the other hand, a good independent publisher a liated
with a major can often do better for you than if you signed to the major
directly. If the indie publisher has enough clout to become a “squeaky wheel”
on your behalf (and remember, the squeaking is on behalf of themselves as
well), it can prevent you from getting lost in the shu e.

SOURCES OF INCOME
As noted, writers get a percentage of what the publisher collects. So let’s rst
take a look at money that goes to the publisher; then we’ll discuss how to make
sure that you get the most of it under your publishing deal.
We’ve already talked a little about mechanicals, which is the second-largest
source of income. Coming in at number one are public performance monies,
with sync at number three. What the hell are those?

PUBLIC PERFORMANCE ROYALTIES
Remember, when we discussed copyrights, that one of your exclusive rights is
the right to perform your composition in public (see page 217)? These rights are
known as performing rights, or public performance rights.
Every time someone performs your song publicly, they need your
permission. That includes playing it on the radio, streaming it to a mobile
device, performing it on television, in nightclubs, in amusement parks, at live
concerts, etc.
So does that mean every radio station, nightclub, etc., in the country (of
which there are tens of thousands) has to get a separate license for every song
they play (of which there are thousands)? And that every publisher has to issue
thousands of licenses to each individual user? The paperwork alone would send
them o to buy that trout farm in Idaho.

Well, rest easy. This is taken care of by something called a blanket license,
which is issued by a performing rights society.
Here’s how it works:

Performing Rights Societies
In the United States, the major performing rights societies (also called PROs,
meaning performing rights organizations) are ASCAP (standing for
American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers), BMI (Broadcast
Music, Incorporated), SESAC (which originally stood for Society of European
Stage Authors and Composers but now stands for “SESAC”), and GMR
(Global Music Rights). Of the four, ASCAP and BMI are the largest by a huge
margin, though SESAC and GMR have a lot of mega-major writers.
ASCAP and BMI have historically been nonproﬁt, meaning they collect
money, pay their expenses, and distribute everything else to the writers and
publishers, though BMI has now moved to a pro t model. SESAC and GMR
have always been for-pro t, meaning they keep a chunk of the money in excess
of expenses, but they say they are able to pay higher rates than ASCAP/BMI for
reasons we’ll discuss later (on page 235). However, you can only join SESAC
and GMR if they invite you (which means their members are established
writers, and which also means you’ll be joining ASCAP or BMI in the
beginning).
Virtually every foreign country has an equivalent PRO for its own territory.
Unlike the United States, there’s generally only one per country, and most of
those are government-sanctioned, such as SACEM for France, GEMA for
Germany, PRS for the United Kingdom, etc. Note I said there’s “generally”
only one PRO; there are some mavericks out there, like Brazil, which has about
twelve PROs. Why twelve? No clue. Ask a Brazilian.
The PROs go to each publisher and say, “Please give us the right to license
performing rights in all your songs. We’ll then go to the people who want to
use them (radio stations, TV stations, concert halls, nightclubs, etc.) and make a
deal that lets them use all the songs of all the publishers we represent. For each
license, we’ll collect the fees, divide them up, and send you a share.”

So publishers sign up with (known as “a liating with”) a PRO. If the
publisher has a lot of writers, they a liate with all the PROs. These societies
then issue licenses to the users, collect the money, and pay it out. Got it?

Blanket Licenses
The license that PROs give each music user is called a blanket license because it
“blankets” (i.e., “covers”) all of the compositions they represent. In other words,
in exchange for a yearly fee, the user gets the right to perform all the
compositions controlled by all the publishers a liated with that society. These
fees can range from a few hundred dollars for a small nightclub to
multimillions for television and streaming networks.

Separate Writer Afﬁliation
It isn’t just publishers who a liate with these societies. The writers also sign on,
and even more important, the writers are paid 50% of the money (the writer’s
share) directly by the society. Meaning, the writer’s performance earnings are
not paid to the publisher; they’re sent directly to the writer. This is designed to
protect the writer (which it does nicely) from aky publishers who might steal
their money.
By the way, writers can only a liate with one society at a time in the United
States (as noted, most of the other territories only have one PRO, so it’s not
much of an issue there…). Historically, writers had only one society for the
world, but there’s a recent trend for writers with a lot of international success to
divide the world (for example, they might a liate with ASCAP or BMI in
America, and PRS [the PRO in the UK] for the rest of the world).

Allocation of License Proceeds
So here are the societies sitting with squillions of dollars from their licenses.
How do they know how much to pay each publisher and writer?

First, the monies are used to pay the operating expenses of the society. At
ASCAP and BMI, everything left over is divided among the participants. At
SESAC and GMR, they keep a pro t before they distribute.
But how, you ask, do the societies know who to pay? Who knows how many
times your songs were played in Pennsylvania nightclubs? Baseball stadiums?
Dinner theaters? Chuck E. Cheese?
Historically, the distributions were all based on radio and TV airplay, then
extrapolated for everything else. But in the digital age, the data pool is far more
detailed (and complicated), so they can more accurately allocate the money. (If
you’re excited by this, apart from checking yourself for brain damage, you can
nd details of these calculations for both BMI and ASCAP on their websites, so
go on over and splash around to your heart’s content.)
Generally, here’s how it works (this is for the U.S. only; the foreign PROs
are, shall we say, “less than transparent”):
1. Streaming.
One of the advantages of digital delivery is that the service providers have
precise data of what’s been played, when, and how many times. The
disadvantage is that they overwhelm the societies with megatons of data
that some poor schlump has to sort out.
Well, actually, that’s not entirely accurate. The major music DSPs
(Apple, Spotify, Amazon, YouTube) have comprehensive databases
(meaning they know the names of the publishers and writers of each
song, what percentage they own, who is the performer, where to send
payments, etc.), so they can report usage back to the PROs. But it’s
expensive and time-consuming to build and maintain such a database,
and not all the major users of music have this information, especially the
UGC services (see page 151 for what that means). At the time of this
writing, services without comprehensive databases or the ability to track
music include Meta/Facebook, TikTok, Twitch, Triller, Roblox, and a
bunch of smaller companies. Also, a lot of these services may not
monetize (meaning “make money,” like by selling ads or a subscription)
directly for music content. In other words, there’s no speci c music

revenue to allocate against the music streams because their revenue is for
the overall site and not just for the music. For example, advertisers on
TikTok buy ads to reach consumers, whether the content they watch is
music-related or some fashionista trashing an eyeliner.
So what happens?
At the moment, they’re either (a) ignoring the publishers, who may
sue or otherwise harass them, (b) negotiating a share of their entire
revenue, meaning they allocate a piece of the overall money to music,
often with a minimum guarantee to the publisher, or (c) negotiating a
at fee with the major publishers for the use of their music, and doing a
deal with the smaller publishers through services that handle this, like
NMPA (National Music Publishers Association, an industry group that
advocates for publishers) or MRI (Music Resources Inc., a private
company that handles licensing).
Since this money isn’t related to speci c usage, how do the publishers
know who to pay? Well, it happens one of two ways:
1. They use what they call a proxy, meaning usage on a similar
platform that monetizes music and accounts the usage. For
example, they might use YouTube (who speci cally monetizes each
stream of music and gives detailed reporting) as a proxy for
Facebook/Meta, who pays a at fee. Or,
2. If there isn’t an analogous proxy, they allocate based on the ratio
that the earnings of their songs from all other sources bears to the
total PRO earnings from those other sources during the period
involved.
2. Over-the-Air and Satellite Radio.
Both ASCAP and BMI use media monitoring companies to scour overthe-air radio stations across the nation, 24/7. They track all performances
on a substantial number of stations, which accounts for 70% to 80% of
the licensing fees, and the balance is done by partially monitoring some
of the stations outside the ones that are fully tracked and extrapolating
the number of plays. By the way, Sirius XM sends the societies

comprehensive usage data for all their plays, so you should get paid
whenever your song is performed there.
3. Television/Video Streaming.
Producers and distributors of video programs, including lm studios,
Net ix, Disney+, Hulu, HBO Max, etc., are generally required to create
and maintain cue sheets for their original programming. Cue sheets are
lists of every musical composition they use, how long it was played, and
how it was used (theme song, background, performed visually, etc.). The
cue sheets are then led with the societies. In addition to cue sheets led
by the folks making or distributing the programs, the video streaming
platforms send speci c performance information directly to the PROs.
Both ASCAP and BMI supplement the cue sheet data by digitally
monitoring broadcasts, and they also use independent statistics to verify
the data.
The PROs set dollar amounts for each type of use (theme,
background, etc.). The amount also varies with the size of the broadcast
area (local station uses generate a lot less than networks), and the size of
that program’s audience.
4. Live Events.
The societies pay based on domestic concert performances, but it’s only
for the top three hundred grossing tours and festivals as reported in a
magazine called Pollstar. However, for those three hundred tours and
festivals, both openers and headliners are paid for these performances, so
about two thousand acts get paid every year. The PROs distribute
concert money based on set lists—lists of the songs played on the tour
—which they get from either the venues or the artist’s management.
PROs also track sports stadiums and arenas, to pick up the songs that
everyone sings along to.
If you’re performing in co ee houses and small venues, these aren’t
tracked separately, but both BMI and ASCAP have programs for you to
submit your materials and get paid something.
5. Background Music.

The ne music you hear in airports, grocery stores, and waiting rooms is
also logged separately.
In addition to a share of income determined by the above, BMI and ASCAP
both pay substantial bonuses for songs with a lot of performances and views,
and that includes “classic” songs that are still performed a lot. The bonuses come
from a pool of money they set aside for this purpose. I’m sorry I can’t give you
much guidance on how the bonuses work because (a) the rules change from
time to time, (b) the amounts also vary by media (audio streaming, video
streaming, television, etc.) and category (pop, classic rock, classical music,
didgeridoos, etc.), and (c) I’ve never actually needed to understand exactly how
they work, so I have no clue.
Both societies pay quarterly (four times per year), and both societies pay
about six to seven months after the calendar quarter in which the monies are
received.

Motion Picture Performance Monies
Due to some fancy footwork by the lm industry a number of years ago, PROs
are not allowed to collect public performance monies for motion pictures
shown in theaters in the United States. There is no logical reason for this
(showing movies is certainly a public performance); it’s just historical and
political. However, foreign territories have never bought into this nonsense,
and motion picture performance monies over there are signi cant. The fees are
collected by local societies, then paid over to your United States PRO, unless of
course you’re a direct member of the foreign society.
Foreign lm performance monies are a percentage of the box-o ce receipts,
which means they can generate a good amount of green (or whatever color the
local currency is). How much? Well, before theaters caught Covid, the
composer of a smash lm score could earn hundreds of thousands of dollars in
foreign performance monies alone. As I write this, the box o ce’s future is
unclear, so who knows what this will be worth. But certainly more than zero,
which is what you get in the United States.

Which Society Is the Best?
Good question.
The best gauge is to look at cross-registered songs, which means a song
written by an ASCAP writer together with a BMI writer, so that each PRO
handles a percentage of the song. In other words, ASCAP collects its share of
the song’s performance monies and pays the ASCAP writer and publisher,
while BMI does the same for its writer and publisher. Since each society collects
and pays independently of the other, we get to see who pays more. And the
result?
No clear answer. As noted above, the societies change their distribution rules
on a regular basis, and the bonuses also a ect the results. So the answer shifts
around. For mainstream writers, I’ve been told they’re pretty similar. For
speci c genres of music, however, one tends to do better than the other, but
that changes over time (because of changes in the distribution and bonus rules).
So, unfortunately, I can’t give you an accurate scorecard.
The big picture is that it shouldn’t matter much if you’re an artist with broad
appeal, but if you’re in a speci c genre, you should join the society that will
treat you more favorably. That’s unfortunately one of those rules that’s easier
said than done, because that information has to be current, and it’s not so
simple to dig up. The people with the data are some of the bigger business
managers (they can look at their clients’ catalogs and compare earnings), or if
you’ve got access to a big publisher with cross-registered songs, they can give
you an even better comparison because they have much more information.
Otherwise, lick your index nger, stick it up in the wind, let it blow. And know
that you’ll be in the position to make a better decision in a few years, when
you’re big enough to get access to the data you need.
As noted earlier, SESAC and GMR claim they pay better rates than ASCAP
or BMI. The only information I have isn’t public, so I can’t really comment.
But it’s certainly possible because of how they’re set up.
Let me explain.
In the United States, ASCAP and BMI are under what’s called a consent
decree, which is fancy legal jargon for the fact that they’re so big and scary that

the government puts restrictions on what they can do (if you want a little more
technical explanation, it means they consented to a legal judgment that spells
out rules they have to follow; if they don’t follow those rules, they’re violating
the United States’ anti-trust laws).
One of the consent decree restrictions is that they can’t refuse to license
anyone. In other words, they have to let everyone perform their songs no
matter what. However, they can argue about how much they should get paid
for that license. If the PRO and the user can’t agree on a price, they go to a
judge who sets the rate.
This seriously impacts the PRO’s bargaining power. If they can’t leverage the
user by refusing to license a song, they don’t have anywhere near the same clout
as if they could.
Enter SESAC and GMR, who are too small to be regulated by the
government. Which means they have no consent decrees. Which means they’re
allowed to say, “We think your o er sucks, so you can’t use our music.”
Accordingly, they should be able to charge more money, and even after taking
out their pro t, they can in theory pay more to the writers. However…
In 2012, a group of radio and television stations sued SESAC, claiming that
they had so much “essential music” (Bob Dylan, Neil Diamond, Kurt Cobain,
among others) that their refusing to license those songs was anti-competitive,
monopolistic, and their breath smelled. As the SESAC case got near to trial,
everyone decided to settle (oh, and I’m sure it helped that the Department of
Justice was sni ng around). According to news accounts, under the
settlement, SESAC paid the radio and TV stations a boatload of money, but in
addition, SESAC agreed it would go to arbitration if they and the users couldn’t
agree on licensing fees. In other words, if they get into a ght, the license goes
ahead and arbitrators decide the rate. That makes it sort of like a consent decree,
though not exactly.
GMR was involved in a similar lawsuit, which was also settled, though the
terms aren’t public.
The Music Modernization Act that I mentioned earlier has some goodies
that make this situation better for ASCAP and BMI. Historically, when there
was a disputed rate, it was decided by a speci c judge (one for ASCAP and one

for BMI) who was appointed for life to hear all the performance rate cases. And
some people felt those judges were too tough on the PROs. In addition, when
the PROs argued for a higher rate, the evidence they could submit was very
limited (for example, the court couldn’t consider the rates paid for sound
recordings).
Under the MMA, while the PROs still can’t refuse to license music, a
di erent judge is now randomly assigned to each case. Also, the MMA allows
the rate court to consider all the market evidence in determining the rate,
including the rates for sound recordings.
These changes should result in higher rates down the road, so stick around.
We’ll know more in the not too distant future.

MORE ABOUT MECHANICAL ROYALTIES
As we discussed on page 219, mechanical royalties are monies paid for the right
to use a song in phonorecords. It’s easy to see how this works for CDs, vinyl,
and downloads. The publisher issues a license to the record company that says
for each record manufactured and distributed, and each digital copy that’s
downloaded, the record company will pay a royalty equal to a speci ed number
of pennies (currently 12¢, unless the song is over ve minutes).
Streaming mechanicals are a WAY more complicated computation, as we’ll
discuss in a minute. Also signi cant is that, unlike physical and downloads,
mechanicals for streaming aren’t paid by the record companies—they’re paid by
the DSPs.

Harry Fox and CMRRA
Two major organizations are delighted to issue mechanical licenses for
publishers. One is the Harry Fox Agency, which is the largest organization of
its kind in the United States, and the other is its Canadian counterpart,
CMRRA, standing for Canadian Musical Reproduction Rights Agency.
Basically, these organizations act like a publisher’s agent for mechanicals. They
issue mechanical licenses for the publisher, police them (i.e., make sure the users

pay), and account to the publisher. For their services, Harry Fox currently
charges 15% of the monies collected, and CMRRA currently charges 6%.
Fox and CMRRA periodically audit record companies and the streaming
services on behalf of all their clients, and then allocate the recovered monies
among their clients in proportion to their earnings. This is particularly
signi cant for a smaller publisher, as the cost of an audit for low earners is
prohibitive. (Today, a typical publishing audit can cost $55,000 or more, and
unless the recovery is likely to be several times this amount, it’s not economical.)
For more info, check out their websites: www.harryfox.com and
www.cmrra.ca.
It may surprise you to know that many midsize publishers (and some larger
publishers) use Fox and CMRRA, because the cost of hiring a sta to issue
numerous licenses and police them is more expensive than the fees these
organizations charge. Recently, however, the trend is for the larger publishers
not to use Fox, as technology has made it easier for them to directly license the
users. Still, most everyone uses CMRRA because they do more than just license
songs. They get involved in things like tari negotiations, government
lobbying, industry litigation, and napkin folding (maybe not the last one; just
seeing if you’re asleep).

STREAMING AND DOWNLOADS
If I stream a song to my mobile phone, is that a performance, a mechanical, or
both?
What if I download a song to my phone? Is that a mechanical only, or is it
also a performance?
Ah, the joys of shoehorning new technologies into a copyright law that was
rst written when wax cylinders were the rage.
Here’s the debate:
The PROs say that streaming a song is just like listening to it on the radio,
which is clearly a performance. Plus they say that a download has to be streamed
to a phone or PC in order to deliver it, so that’s also a performance.

The publishers, who collect mechanical royalties directly from the DSPs, say
that you can’t stream music without making a copy on the DSP’s computer
server, and caching it on a mobile phone. And those are reproductions of the
song, so you need a mechanical license. Also, streaming is replacing sales, so it
should be treated as a mechanical. And downloading a song is the same as the
sale of physical product, so it’s clearly a mechanical right.
Well, they’re both sort of right. But underneath all this posturing was really a
ght about who gets paid to collect it: the PROs, the publishers, or both?
Interestingly, Europe worked this out before we did (of course, over history,
they’ve worked out a lot of things before we did…). It varies by country, but
generally a download is 25% performance and 75% mechanical (slight variation
in some regions, like Scandinavia, where it’s 30% performance). Streaming is
not so consistent, and some territories pay a di erent rate for free vs.
subscription streaming. Generally, it’s 75% performance and 25% mechanical,
but Scandinavia is 70% performance, Germany is 66.66% performance, the
United Kingdom is 50/50. France is 50/50 for free streams, but 25%
performance for paid subscriptions. And then there’s weird places like Serbia,
Lichtenstein, and Turkey, which are 100% performance and zippo for
mechanicals. (So maybe they didn’t work it out so well after all…)
Anyway, after the predictable wrangling in the United States, everyone came
to an understanding on this issue. As of now, here’s the U.S. scorecard in the
Mechanical vs. Performance cage match:

Permanent Downloads
Let’s start with an easy one: permanent downloads, like the ones sold on
iTunes.
It’s well settled that these downloads are treated just like sales of physical
product. That means you get a mechanical royalty only, and it’s not a
performance.

Non-interactive Audio Streaming

Non-interactive means someone else decides what you hear (as opposed to you
choosing the music yourself). It’s essentially a radio station that’s delivered via
streaming.
It’s now settled that you don’t get mechanicals, only performance monies
(from ASCAP, BMI, etc.) for non-interactive streams. Which is exactly what
you’d get if an over-the-air station played your music.
The rates are pretty complex, and they change over time, but in essence
they’re a percentage of revenue, with minimums per stream (in case the user
doesn’t have much revenue). For the most current state of play, you can check
out the standard non-interactive performance licenses on the PRO websites.
Generally, PROs get about 6% of the DSP’s revenue (for all the PROs
combined).
Monster streaming companies (Spotify, Apple Music, and the like) don’t
take these standard, o -the-shelf licenses, in the same way that CBS television
doesn’t take an o -the-shelf performance license that’s geared to local TV
stations. Instead, the big guys negotiate their own speci c deals with each PRO.
For the technical freaks out there (the rest of you can skip to the interactive
streaming section below), there’s an important di erence between Internet
streaming and over-the-air stations. As I mentioned earlier, before you can
stream on the Internet, you have to make a copy of the song on your server, and
two lawsuits have held that a server copy of a copyrighted song requires a
license: UMG Recordings et al. v. MP3.com, Inc., 92 F. Supp 2d 349 (2000),
and Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization et al. v. UMG Recordings, Inc.,
and the Farm Club Online, Inc., 60 U.S. P.Q. 2D [BNA] 1342 (2001). Note
this server copy license is in addition to the performance license. A
performance license lets you stream. The server copy license lets you make a
copy. (Take a look back to our discussion of the various rights in a copyright on
page 216. One is the right to perform, and the other is the right to duplicate.
However, as industry practice, the publishers only require a performance
license for non-interactive streaming.)
Over-the-air radio stations also make server copies of recordings for
broadcast, but they’re allowed to do this without a license under a speci c
provision of the copyright law (their server copy is called an ephemeral

recording under Section 112 of the Copyright Act). Technically, this only gives
them the right to make a copy of the sound recording, not the song, but if they
have a performance license, they’re good as a matter of industry practice.
Webcasters who are not over-the-air broadcasters wanted the same rights, and
after some back-and-forth, the industry practice settled down to the same result:
non-interactive services only need a performance license.

Interactive Audio Streaming (On-Demand
Streaming)
Now for some more complicated stu . Stay with me; this is the biggest part of
the business and growing. I promise to go slowly, though of course I can’t
control your reading speed…
As we discussed, interactive streaming lets you call up whatever song you
want to hear, whenever you want to hear it. The big players are Spotify, Apple
Music, YouTube, and Amazon Music.
As you may recall, there’s a compulsory license for songs used in interactive
streaming (see page 219). The rates for this streaming license (and all other
compulsory copyright licenses, not just music) are set by the Copyright
Royalty Board. The Copyright Royalty Board (CRB to its pals) is made up of
three administrative judges who probably have no sense of humor. These judges
take in lots of evidence (shockingly, the DSPs argue that the rate is too high, and
copyright owners say it’s too low), then the judges sit around and think about it.
When they’re done cogitating, they deliver the new rates for compulsory
licenses.
By the way, the Music Modernization Act recently changed the standard
that the CRB uses to set rates from a limited-evidence process to a “willing
buyer/willing seller” standard, which the music industry has wanted for years.
“Willing buyer/willing seller” means a rate that two people would agree to in a
free marketplace if they wanted to make a deal, and it allows the CRB to
consider all the market data.
In 2018, much to the dismay of the digital service providers, the CRB gave
the publishers a gigantic increase over the old rates, with bumps built into the

future years. Some of the DSPs appealed this decision, and on the eve of trial,
the various industry groups (DiMA, who represent the DSPs; NMPA, acting
for the publishers: and NSAI, acting for the songwriters) had a Kum Ba Yah
camp re and agreed on a settlement. They turned their deal over to the CRB,
who blessed it into law, and these new rates took e ect on January 1, 2023.
The new agreement is called Phonorecords IV. That’s a Roman numeral 4,
because it’s the fourth time the CRB set new rates (not a nod to IV drugs,
though some may have been required during this process).
Like in the past, these rates are a set of formulas that cover (a) subscription
streaming services; (b) subscription streaming services that are bundled with
other services (which we’ll discuss in the next section; for example, Amazon
music that comes free with Amazon Prime); (c) portable services (meaning you
can get the music on a portable device); (d) nonportable services (you can
probably gure out that one); and (e) non-subscription/advertiser-supported
services. (Whew.)
And if that’s not exciting enough, we have subcategories for the subscription
services! There are rates for (1) services that only play when you’re connected to
the Internet, (2) those that play both when you’re connected and when you’re
not, and (3) limited-o ering subscriptions, meaning subscriptions that are
either (a) non-interactive, or (b) for only a particular genre, or limited playlists.
Can you stand the excitement?
Note this license covers only mechanicals, and not performance money
(though the CRB rates are reduced by the amounts paid by the DSP for
performance money, which we’ll discuss below). Also, remember this is only
for songs, not recordings. There is no compulsory rate for interactive streaming
of recordings (we covered how those are paid on page 144).
In a very simplistic form, the compulsory license for interactive streaming
works like this (I use the word “simplistic” guardedly; like, the “simplistic”
formula to sequence genomes):
1. First, you look at the rate for the applicable year. Under the CRB ruling,
the rate for 2023 is the greater of:

(a) 15.1% of the service’s revenue for the period involved (which goes to
15.2% in 2024), or
(b) The lesser of:
(i) 26.2% of something called TCC, meaning Total Content Cost.
In other words, the total amount that the service pays out for the
right to make interactive streams and limited downloads of
sound recordings for that period, or
(ii) 60¢ per subscriber per month for non-portable subscription
streaming services, or $1.10 per month for portable streaming
services. The applicable amount is called a per-subscriber
minimum, or PSM). We discussed PSMs on page 144, in the
context of streaming recordings, and the concept here is the
same. Regardless of what the digital service actually collects, they
can’t pay out less than the applicable percentage of a persubscriber minimum (PSM) multiplied times their total
subscribers. This keeps the DSP from dropping its prices too low
(or at least it costs the DSP a bigger percentage if they do).
However, there is no per-sub minimum for the free ad-supported
services, because there’s no subscription money.
In determining the number of subscribers for this calculation, they
treat a family plan as 1.75 subscribers, and students as a half subscriber
each. If you’re a student, don’t take it personally…
To be clear, the PSM is not 60¢ per song per month; that would
bankrupt the digital service provider. It’s a minimum gure that the
service has to pay for all the songs used, divided among all the songs and
their publishers.
Under the CRB ruling, the percentages in (a) will increase over the
next few years, as follows:

Royalty Year
Percent of
Revenue

2024–2027 Interactive Streaming Rates
2024
2025
2026
15.2%
15.25%
15.3%

2027
15.35%

2. Once you have the result of the multiplication game under 1, you
subtract the amount that the DSPs have to pay for performance license
(generally about 6%). Let’s call that the net subscription amount (a
term I just made up).
3. You then see if the net subscription amount is less than a royalty oor,
and if it is, you get the oor. The oor varies with the type of service,
from a low of 18¢ PSM for stand-alone non-portable streaming services,
to a high of 60¢ for standalone portable subscriptions. (The family and
student calculations are the same as above.)
4. Okay. So now you’ve computed the net subscription amount (under 1
and 2) and PSM royalty oor (under 3). You take the higher of those two
gures (let’s call it the Base, which is another term I just made up), then
gure out your share of it. This is done by computing the percentage
that your plays for the period involved bears to the total plays for that
period, then multiplying that percentage times the Base. So if you had
10% of the total plays, and the base was $100,000, you’d get $10,000.
But wait! There’s more! In computing your percentage of the Base,
you get more of the pie if your songs are longer than ve minutes. Here’s
the formula:
(1) 5:01 to 6:00 minutes: Each play = 1.2 plays
(2) 6:01 to 7:00 minutes: Each play = 1.4 plays
(3) 7:01 to 8:00 minutes: Each play = 1.6 plays
(4) 8:01 to 9:00 minutes: Each play = 1.8 plays
(5) 9:01 to 10:00 minutes: Each play = 2.0 plays
(6) For playing times of greater than 10 minutes, continue to add .2 for
each additional minute or fraction of a minute.
Got it?
If you really want to understand this in more detail, check out 37 CFR Part
385, which is published in the Federal Register. Subpart B is in Federal Register
vol. 87, no. 241, p. 76937, and Subpart C is in vol. 87, no. 250, p. 80448. You

might want to print a few copies and keep them next to your bed, in case of
insomnia.
These new rates are for 2023 to 2027, but they also apply to streams going
back to 2018. That’s because, while the DSPs were appealing the 2018 rates,
they kept paying the 2017 rates and ignoring the fact that the rates had gone up.
So now there’s a true-up for those years, which is several hundred million
dollars going from the DSPs to the publishers.
The above rates are for U.S. streaming. Foreign streaming royalties get more
complicated. Much more complicated.
First o , there’s no compulsory license for streaming in foreign territories,
which means every DSP has to license every song directly from the publisher. If
that sounds like the DSPs need a lot of licenses, it’s because they do.
To help streamline this, the publishers set up something called Collective
Management Organizations (CMOs), which are also called hubs. These
organizations license both mechanical and performance rights for most of the
world on behalf of those publishers, so the DSPs can get major chunks of
catalog in one place.
The major publishers’ hubs are:
1. SOLAR: a venture between Sony ATV, PRS for Music, and GEMA
(the German performing rights organization).
2. DEAL (Direct European Administration and Licensing): a venture
between Universal Music Publishing and SACEM (the French
performing rights organization).
3. PEDL (Pan European Digital Licensing): through which Warner
Chappell has a non-exclusive agreement with several societies.
There are similar CMOs that license independent publishers’ songs:
1. ARESA GmbH (Anglo-American Rights European Service Agency): a
subsidiary of GEMA that administers BMG’s catalog, among others.
2. ICE Rights: a JV between PRS, STIM, and GEMA, which represents a
number of independent publishers’ rights via IMPEL (a collective of

independent publishers).
And, of course, there’s the mother of all these organizations, whose initials
are CONFUSION.
Publishers aren’t required to license all territories through these hubs, so they
can exclude some if they want. For example, a publisher might give some rights
to APRA, an organization that handles SE Asia, Australia, New Zealand, and
parts of Africa.
In Latin America (whose fraternity nickname is LATAM), the rules require
DSPs to get licenses directly from indigenous inhabitants. So, the Latin
American publishers and PROs don’t participate in the major hubs. In other
words, to get licenses for these territories, the DSPs have to head south (unless
you’re based in Antarctica, in which case you can go north). For other LATAM
countries, Latinautor handles digital performances. If your catalog is in BIEM,
Latinautor also does mechanicals. If you’re not BIEM, each publisher makes a
direct deal with the societies (though bigger publishers deal through an out t
called Ventanilla Unica).
There’s an interesting story on how performance rights work in these hubs.
All the PROs have what’s called reciprocal arrangements with PROs outside
their territory. These deals say that each PRO agrees that foreign PROs can
license their music for that PRO’s territory, and vice versa. For example,
suppose a writer in the U.S. a liates with ASCAP, and their song is played in
France. Because of its reciprocal arrangement with ASCAP, SACEM (the
French PRO) can license that song in France, even though it has no deal with
the writer. It then collects the money in France and sends it back to ASCAP
(who pays the writer). This also works the other way around for a French writer
whose song is performed in the U.S. However, under these deals, none of the
PROs are allowed to license music beyond their territories—in our example,
SACEM can only license the U.S. song in France. So how do hubs get the right
to issue near-global licenses?
So glad you asked.
It’s very expensive (in terms of software, labor, and time) to track billions of
streams in each territory, and the smaller PROs around the world quickly

realized it wasn’t worth the expense if they could get those services cheaper.
Notice the hubs are all run by major PROs, and those folks have all the
infrastructure to handle digital licensing. So, the other PROs agreed the hubPROs could license their rights in all the hub territories (for digital only).
Let’s recap: The hubs get mechanical rights from the publishers, and
performance rights (beyond their own territory) from the other PROs. They
then license mechanical/performance rights to the DSPs as a package, in
exchange for a percentage of the streaming service’s revenue.
How much do they pay? Well, unlike the statutory streaming rate in the
U.S., the percentage is speci cally negotiated by the hub and the DSP. The exact
numbers are con dential, but I’m told they’re generally in the low to mid-teens
for combined mechanicals and performance (we discussed for how this breaks
down between mechanicals and performance on page 239).
The hub pays the mechanical part of the money to the publisher, then
divides the performance part by paying half to the publisher (as the publisher’s
share of performance), and the other half (the writer’s share) to the writer’s
PRO. The writer’s PRO then pays the writer.
An important exception to this happy little factory is that some PROs
(typically BIEM societies) don’t usually let these hubs license their local writers.
For example, music by a German writer directly a liated with GEMA (the
German PRO) wouldn’t be included in a hub license. So, if the DSPs want
access to this repertoire, they also need a deal with the local society, or else they
have to adjust their programming to exclude the oompah bands.

Stuck in the Middle with…
Remember the compulsory license and rates are only for interactive streaming.
What if you’re sort of an interactive service? For example, you like a song on
Spotify and tell it to make a radio station based on it. In other words, you’re
listening to a service that picks what they stream (meaning you can’t punch up a
speci c song for your listening pleasure). That alone is not really interactive,
but what if you can skip an unlimited number of songs. Or what if the service

lets you replay songs? Or see a listing of the songs before they play them? Or
hear a speci c artist more than a few times each hour?
Some DSPs have a mid-tier service that lets you replay songs and listen to a
limited number of stations when you’re not connected online. The DSPs could
take a compulsory license for this, but the rates are too expensive, so these deals
get negotiated speci cally. While the terms aren’t public, I understand the rates
are somewhere between a performance license rate (around 6%) and the above
statutory rates for interactive streams.

Video Streaming
You may remember that there’s no compulsory license for videos. That means
the CRB has no jurisdiction over video streaming services like YouTube and
Vevo. Which means the publishers can charge whatever they want. Which is:
For record company–produced videos, the publishers get a percentage of ad
revenues and/or subscription monies. The rates aren’t public, but I understand
it’s somewhere in the 10% range. Sometimes they also get a fraction of a penny
as a minimum per-stream payment, or a minimum per-subscriber payment.
For user-generated videos (the UGC we discussed on page 151), the major
publishers have licenses with YouTube, and Harry Fox represents some of the
indies (but not all of them). Meaning there’s no central place for the YouTubes
of the world to make a deal for all their music. As to rates, after some amount of
wrangling, the National Music Publishers Association (NMPA)—an industry
organization that represents publishers in both lobbying and dealing with users,
came to an agreement with YouTube and that deal is the norm (for a while
anyway). The Fox Agency can do the license for you, though they act for
YouTube (meaning they’re not representing you; they were hired by YouTube
to help them). YouTube also has an opt-in license, which you can nd on its
website, meaning you elect to use it (“opt in”) with a few clicks and therefore
directly license your music to them. The direct license has the advantage of
dealing directly with the DSP (rather than have Fox in the middle).
The terms for UGC video are:

1. If it’s a user-created video that includes a commercial recording of the
song, the video streaming service pays the publisher 15% of net ad
revenues. (Some of the smaller streaming services actually pay the record
label, which in turn pays this amount to the publisher.)
2. If it’s a new recording of the song (like Uncle Lenny, the musical saw
virtuoso of Picayune, Texas), the publisher gets 50% of net ad revenues.
It’s more because the DSP doesn’t have to pay the label. The only
exception is cases where the uploader gets some of the ad revenue (for
example, if Lenny has a YouTube channel and gets a cut of ad money).
In that case, YouTube deducts whatever it pays Lenny from the
publisher’s 50%. However, this deduction is limited to 15%, meaning the
publisher never gets less than 35% of net ad revenue.
While I understand that YouTube’s content identi cation program
does a good job of recognizing commercial sound recordings, I’m told it
doesn’t pick up live versions of UGC as well. So your publisher has to
police this—yet another example of how complicated the world is
becoming, and how di cult (and expensive) it is for publishers to make
sure they get their share from the river of pennies (more accurately,
“fractions of pennies”).
As you can see, these models are not only complicated, but also require
publishers to track usage all over the Internet. And while the big publishers have
sophisticated tracking systems, what about the rest of us? Well, the Fox Agency
o ers these services, as do a number of competitors. For example, Songtrust
helps songwriters and publishers track and collect all their publishing income.
They are located, not surprisingly, at www.songtrust.com. Other companies in
this area are Audiam (www.audiam.com) and AdRev (www.adrev.net), which
monetizes YouTube.

MUSIC MODERNIZATION ACT
All right! You’ve now got enough background to understand what the Music
Modernization Act (MMA) is about. (Well, at least most of it. There’s a little

more to come later.)
As we discussed, a compulsory license is one that a publisher has to give you,
whether they want to or not, as long as you check the right boxes under the
Copyright Act. And as we also discussed, to get a compulsory mechanical
license for physical or downloads, one of those boxes is that your recording
must be the second or later recording of a song (meaning a cover record).
Well, for the rst time under the copyright law, the MMA created a
compulsory license for the ﬁrst use of a song. But (a) this license is only for
streaming, and (b) you can only get this compulsory license if both the
recording and the song have been licensed for streaming. Meaning you already
have a voluntary license to stream the song.
So, as I asked before, why would you need a compulsory license if you
already have a voluntary license? Well, time to answer that question:
You don’t need a compulsory license for streaming when you already have a
voluntary license.
Does that mean Congress is insane? (You can take the Fifth Amendment.)
Well, not this time, anyway. They passed the MMA in 2018 to x a nasty
problem that existed in the streaming world.
Here’s the background. When streaming was an infant, Spotify and the
other services went into uncharted waters with their business model. They
quickly discovered that they were dealing with multimillions of songs, and
billions of lines of data. And a lot of these songs had more than one owner.
To put it mildly, the digital service providers (DSPs) were overwhelmed. For
starters, they had no idea who owned a lot of these songs, much less where to
reach them. It’s simple enough to nd the major publishers, but they don’t
control all the songs. In fact, even on songs where the majors have an interest,
they sometimes don’t have all the rights (because some of the multiple owners
of the songs aren’t major publishers, or because the major only controls certain
territories of the world, etc.). And even if the DSPs could nd the owners, the
DSPs weren’t set up to handle tens of thousands of licenses from obscure
publishers around the world.
All this resulted in the DSPs having tens of millions of dollars that they
didn’t know where to pay. So they did what any red-blooded businessperson

would do—they held on to it, waiting for folks to show up. (In the biz, we call
these unallocated monies pending and unmatched.)
It didn’t take the publishers long to wake up, and when they did, they called
the DSPs and said, “Um, you’ve got a lot of our money.” Some of the players
worked it out, but a lot of the indies sued the DSPs, claiming that the DSPs were
infringing their copyrights because they didn’t have licenses to use their songs.
This claim, by the way, had the added bene t of being true (I know, unusual
concept). In a lot of the indie cases, the DSPs didn’t even know who to ask for a
license.
Historically, the tech business and the music biz were not the best of friends.
After all, when Napster started, the techies made a lot of money selling
computers, access to the Internet to steal songs, CD burners, and the like.
But with the DSPs heading for a crashing loss in court, they suddenly had a
stake in nding a solution to this pending and unmatched problem.
Meanwhile, the music publishers wanted a system that got everyone accurately
paid, so they didn’t have to sue and wait years to get their money. In other
words, we had one of those rare times when both sides were aligned in their
goals, and this moment of divine harmony gave birth to the MMA. (By the way,
before the MMA, there was a procedure in place with some publishers that was
similar to how the MMA ended up, but the DSPs wanted someone other than
the publishers to handle the money, so that’s how we got here. You’ll see who
that is in a second, but rst I have to continue building suspense.)
With both sides pushing the bill forward, Congress didn’t get any of the
vicious threats it usually gets from the opposition. So the bill was passed and
signed into law relatively quickly. (Don’t get used to that…)
The MMA solves the pending and unmatched problem by setting up
something called the Mechanical License Collective (MLC). This
organization, which the DSPs fund, has the authority to collect all the
mechanical rights money from the DSPs. (It doesn’t collect performance
monies; those go to the PROs.)
To give the MLC the right to collect all this dough, the MMA created the
compulsory license we discussed. In essence, this a blanket license (see page 230,
where we talked about PRO blanket licenses). As long as the DSPs pay the MLC

for all their streams, they can stream any song without being guilty of copyright
infringement.
The MMA also allows the MLC to collect money from voluntary licenses
negotiated by both sides. In other words, the major publishers can still make
their own deals with the DSPs, but the MLC will collect the money centrally
and pass it on.
So the MLC neatly solves the problem of DSPs not knowing who to pay,
and puts the dough in the hands of an independent party instead of the DSP’s
bank account. Or, I should say, it neatly solves the problem for U.S. publishers.
The pending and unmatched problem is still alive and well on foreign soil.
Also, the MLC only works in the United States if the publisher is eligible to
register with the MLC, meaning the DSP complies with the terms of the
compulsory license. And who complies? This license is just like the compulsory
mechanical license we discussed on page 219, meaning it’s just for audio-only
streaming. Which means services that have video materials with their music, like
TikTok and Meta/Facebook, can’t use the compulsory license and have to get a
voluntary license from the publishers. These non-compliant users could
voluntarily contract with the MLC to handle their licensing, but so far that
hasn’t happened.
Under this system, publishers le claims with the MLC for the songs they
own, and the MLC pays out one hundred percent of the money it collects—as I
noted earlier, the law requires the DSPs to fund the MLC, so there’s no
deduction of costs or commissions. That’s a really big deal, because every other
collection agent charges a percentage.
But what if no one claims a particular song? In that case, the MLC can’t
know who to pay. What happens to the money?
Well, the MLC hangs on to it for a period of time, then (if it’s still
unclaimed) pays the money to everyone who did le claims. Speci cally, the
MLC holds unclaimed monies until January 1 of the second full calendar year
after the license availability date, then if nobody shows up to claim it, they pay it
out to the people who did claim (other) songs for that period. These unclaimed
monies are allocated on the basis of the market share of each publisher who
claimed money. So, for example, if you had 10% of the market share in that

period, you’d get 10% of the unclaimed money. (This is very similar to blackbox
monies we’ll discuss in subpublishing deals on page 270.)
An interesting aspect of the MMA is that it requires publishers to pay at least
50% of the unclaimed monies to their songwriters, allocated on the basis of each
song’s earnings. This is similar to the breakage concept we discussed on page
147, and it keeps the publishers from just pocketing the dough.
Remember this all started because the DSPs couldn’t gure out who to pay?
Well, the MMA also requires the MLC to set up and maintain a free, publicly
available database of all the songs, publishers, and writers. This will truly be a
valuable asset. If you’ve ever tried to track down a song, it’s not a fun journey…
So now you understand why the weird compulsory license. Without it,
there’d be no basis for the DSPs to pay the MLC and be absolved of copyright
infringement.
You can bank that in your database.

17
Even More Publishing Income

Now let’s take a look at other kinds of publishing income: synchronization,
print, foreign monies, and other assorted goodies. And along the way, we’ll hit
controlled composition clauses. You won’t want to miss that one.

SYNCHRONIZATION AND TRANSCRIPTION
LICENSES
As we discussed in connection with recordings, on page 152, a
synchronization (sync) license is a license to use music in “timed
synchronization” with visual images. This concept applies equally to songs, such
as when a song is used in a motion picture, a television program, a commercial,
an audiovisual streaming, a video game, a virtual concert in the Metaverse, etc.
As with recordings, it doesn’t include radio, podcasts, or audio-only
commercials (since they’re not synchronized with visuals). Those licenses are
called transcription licenses.

Fees
The fees for synchronization licenses are really all over the board, and they vary
with exactly how the song is used, which media you want, how long you want
to use it, and the importance of the song. The budget of the production is also a
factor—fees for a big budget, major studio lm are much more than those for

an indie lm; an established TV show pays more than a new one; and all of
those pay more money than a purely Internet webisode.
Also, keep in mind that this chapter is only talking about fees for the song. If
the recording is also being used, there’s a separate fee for that, which is almost
always an equal amount (exceptions, for instance, are situations like an iconic
song that’s re-recorded by an unknown artist; in that case, the song usually gets
more than the recording).
An example of the lowest-end fee would be a ten-second background use of
an unknown song in a television show, maybe being played on a jukebox while
the actors are talking and ignoring it. A high-end example would be an oncamera, full-length performance of a well-known song in a major studio’s highbudget lm.
And when we get into the realm of commercials, the fees go even higher.
Here’s an idea of the range. These are very general and can swing widely in
either direction. As I said, sync quotes are unique and fact-speci c. They
depend on the usage, the importance of the song and the artist, the mood the
publisher is in, etc.
1. Motion pictures.
Major Studios. Motion picture sync licenses for a major studio lm can
run in the range of $25,000 to $50,000 (for very minor usage of a song
that’s not particularly well known) to over $100,000. Main title usages
(meaning over the opening credits) are generally from $100,000 to
$500,000, and end title usages are less, in the range of $50,000 to
$100,000 (why pay as much for a song that plays while everybody’s
walking out of the theater or clicking o the streaming app?). The end
title song fees may also be lower if there’s more than one song over the
credits, which happens these days.
Of course, if it’s an incredibly hot, recent hit song, and the lm
company is salivating over it, these gures can get very high into six
gures, sometimes even more.
For these fees, the lm companies want more than just the right to use
the song in the movie. They also want in-context uses. In-context means

using the song apart from the lm with the same visual images that
accompany it in the lm. For example, if your song is used in the lm
while lovers stroll down a beach looking lovingly at each other, and that
same scene is in a commercial for the lm, that’s an in-context use. The
primary in-context uses are for trailers (longform ads for the movie),
clips, and promotions (like excerpts on talk shows while the lm’s stars
are interviewed). Publishers want to limit the in-context licenses to
trailers only (meaning no ads or other promotions that don’t use the full
trailer), but they’ll give more rights if they get more money.
Studios often want the rights to out-of-context uses, which are, not
surprisingly, the opposite of the in-context uses we discussed in the
preceding paragraph. In other words, out-of-context means using the
music di erently from the way it’s used in the lm. For example, playing
the song in a television ad while showing another scene from the movie.
Out-of-context also includes things like a featurette (short lms
showing behind-the-scenes footage that was taken while the lm was
being made; this is also called a making-of). You should get more money
for out-of-context uses, generally in the range of about $50,000 to
$100,000, but it could be much more if it’s a big song.
By the way, studios sometimes license songs that aren’t in the movie
for out-of-context uses; essentially, that’s licensing the song into a
commercial for the movie. Those prices run about the same, though if
the song is also in the movie, sometimes there’s a reduction.
2. Independent Films.
For low-budget, independent lms, the deals get much more creative.
Funny how things always get more creative when someone doesn’t have
any money.
The fees are of course much lower, at least initially (as we’ll discuss),
and the price also depends on the kind of indie lm involved. For
example, is it a 99 Cent Store type of lm (budget of $500,000 to $1
million), with unknown directors, actors, etc., or is it an indie lm that
features major stars and/or directors who are working as a labor of love?
While this last category may be low budget, the publishers are not all that

sympathetic—these lms can have real commercial success. Accordingly,
these kinds of lms often pay higher fees (sometimes as much as the
major lm fees discussed above), at least for important music.
Some indie lms are made by producers who barely scraped the
money together, and they don’t even have a distributor (meaning a
company to put the lm in theaters and/or online, and also pay for
advertising and marketing). In these cases, the producers run around to
lm festivals with the movie tucked under their arm, trying to nd
someone to adopt their baby. For these situations, a typical sync deal is a
cheap license that only allows them to show the lm in festivals. It’s
usually limited to a term of one year, with fees in the range of $500 to
$2,500. If the producers get a distributor, they come back and negotiate
a full set of rights.
The full rights use fees are speci cally negotiated depending on all the
factors we discussed, so I can’t give you much guidance, except to say
they’re substantially less than the fees quoted above for major lms.
Sometimes there’s an initial lower fee plus an additional fee (a) for
hitting box-o ce numbers (not as relevant these days), (b) when it goes
on traditional TV (also less relevant), or (c) when it’s streamed. Or the
publisher might ask for a percentage of the lm’s net revenue. Or, with a
major song, the publisher might not quote anything beyond festivals but
rather say they’ll discuss it when there’s a deal to put out the lm.
Sometimes, at the time the festival license deal is made, the publisher
will quote a price for the rights beyond the lm festivals (imaginatively
called a quote). This is good for the lmmaker, because they know what
it will cost to go forward. But the publisher will limit how long the
quote is valid (for example, it’s only good for for ninety days to six
months, after which it expires and the lm folks have to negotiate from
scratch).
3. Documentaries.
Documentaries (which are called “docs” by their friends) historically
made little money, so they got cheap fees. But with the advent of Net ix,

HBO, Disney+, and other players hungry for documentary content, the
budgets have risen, and so has the price of songs.
If a doc is independently made and going to festivals to shop for a
distribution deal, the fees are about the same as those for indie lms that
we discussed in 2 above. If the doc already has a home (like Net ix or
Amazon), the budget could be substantial, but lmmakers plead for
mercy because the music license fees come out of their pocket, not the
studio’s. That’s because their deal for the doc will be for a set dollar
amount that includes all costs of making the lm, and a chunk of those
costs are music. So every dollar that goes to music comes from whatever
pro t the lmmakers would make on top of their costs. And the
streamers want all rights cleared, so these licenses are more expensive.
A general range is $2,000 to $7,500 per song, but it could be more
for a major song that’s used prominently. To the extent publishers think
the doc will help promote a song, or if a songwriter really wants their
song included in the project, things get exible. And if a documentary is
music-centric (such as the life of a major star), the publishers de nitely
see this as promotional for their songs and will do cheaper licenses.
4. Television.
Except for the competition and talk shows, which we’ll discuss in a
minute, most TV licenses are now in perpetuity and include the right to
use the program in all media now or hereafter known. But here’s some
things you should try to carve out:
a. You shouldn’t give out-of-context trailers (see page 254 for what
that is), though you’ll have to give in-context trailers.
b. Except for in-context trailers, don’t let them use clips of your song
apart from the show. (This is tougher to get with competition
shows.)
c. Exclude theatrical releases, as some TV shows get released in
theaters, particularly outside the United States. So if you exclude
the rights, you can make a deal at the time. However, some
streaming shows will push hard for the option to do a theatrical

release outside the U.S. If you give them these rights, you should
get more money.
How much can you get television usage? Around $10,000 to
$50,000 plus, depending on whether they’re licensing an obscure song
or a well-known hit, and also how prominently it’s used. If you’re an
indie artist looking for exposure—some artists have launched their
careers by having music on a big TV show—you might give them a very
cheap rate, meaning $1,000 or so. Sometimes it’s even less, since they
know they “gotcha.” On the other hand, if you’re a superstar who
couldn’t care less, you’ll carve out their livers.
Unless you’re a really major player, you won’t get any more money
for in-context ads; that’s always included in the price. If they want outof-context ads, however, you can get paid for the speci c promotional
uses. It’s a weekly fee, based on a menu of prices, depending on where
the song is used. For example, there’s one price for using your song on
the network and its a liates only, another price for basic cable, another
for wireless mobile, and so forth. Impossible again to give you much
guidance, as it depends on the song and the usage, but it’s generally a few
thousand dollars per week for each category (network, mobile, etc.).
Sometimes you can limit how long they run the promo.
The competition shows (like American Idol, X Factor, The Voice,
Dancing with the Stars, Shark Tank Karaoke—okay I made up the last
one…) and talk shows (Fallon, Colbert, etc.), pay according to a menu
that’s set in concrete. In other words, they tell you what they’re willing
to pay for the rights they want, plus they get options for further rights at
set prices. All these deals are done on a most favored nations (MFN)
basis, meaning they pay the same fee for every song on the show, no
matter what. So there’s no negotiating the fees—these shows use such a
huge amount of music that they don’t have time to negotiate every
contract separately. Either you take what they o er, or you don’t put
your song in the show.
The exact license fees vary from show to show, but if all rights were
exercised, they’d be in the range set out above for non-competition

shows. However, they start with a small fee (which also varies among the
shows, but it’s several thousand dollars) that allows them to use the song
for two to ve years, in the United States and Canada only. For that
initial fee, they get things like unlimited broadcasts (within the two- to
ve-year term), recaps (a program that features clips from earlier shows
in the season), streaming, and in-context usage for advertising and
promotion. Some shows are even sophisticated enough to license the
lyrics, in case the camera pans past a contestant who’s reading the lyrics
while singing.
If they want to go beyond those rights, they’ll pay additional amounts
for things like territories outside the United States and Canada,
downloads of the program, and extending their rights to perpetuity.
They also have to pay if they repurpose the original use, meaning use it
apart from the show. For example, they take a clip from a TV show and
exploit it alone online. Payment for this can be a at fee, or sometimes a
rolling fee based on the view count of a video (for example, $X for every
500,000 views). Sometimes there’s a revenue share of the gross earnings,
meaning advertising money around the video, which can run anywhere
from 15% to 50%.
5. Streaming services (Net ix, Amazon, Hulu, etc.).
The deals for these services are in line with the motion picture and
television deals we just discussed. However, the PRO performance
money you get for streaming is much smaller than what you’d get for
performances on television or in foreign theaters, because the streamers
pay far less than the television networks and foreign theaters (if you
don’t recall, see page 229 for what performance monies are). So try to
get a higher licensing fee to make up for this.
6. Commercials.
For commercials, a reasonably well-known song can get anywhere from
$50,000 to well into six gures for a one-year national usage in the
United States, on television, radio, and Internet. Really well-known
songs in major campaigns can go higher, sometimes over a million for a
classic, iconic song.

These gures get scaled down for regional or local usages, and for
periods of less than a year.
Internet-only usage is on the rise, and the prices are rapidly going up
for the simple reason that these ads reach a lot of people—particularly the
younger folks that advertisers want, who rarely watch television these
days.
The issue of “territory” on the Internet is interesting, as the Net is of
course available worldwide. Your license should require the advertiser to
geo- lter, which means the commercial can only be available to users in
the territories you gave them. That works reasonably well, though I’m
told it’s not that hard to get around it.
A new twist that really scrambles your brain is the “repurposing of
commercials for commercial use.”
Huh?
Well, for example, you take an incredible Super Bowl commercial,
put it on a YouTube channel and run ads around it (ads that run prior to
playing the video, which are called pre-rolls, plus the usual banner ads,
pop-ups, etc.). So they’re actually making money running commercials,
by running other commercials. I know, weird…
Well, the publishers quickly gured out that sometimes the advertiser
earned more than the cost of the commercial using this little trick. So
now they either exclude repurposing from the deal, or they charge an
additional amount for it. That’s usually an additional at fee, but it can
be a share of the advertising revenue (15% to 50%, depending on the
usage and the stature of the song).
7. Video Games.
Here we’re talking about real video games (like Call of Duty, Grand
Theft Auto) and not apps. Apps are on deck, coming up next.
As we discussed in the context of recordings (on page 156), video
game makers don’t think any particular song adds that much value, so
the deals are almost all at fees and not royalties.
The fee for a video game license can be as low as “nothing,” for
example, if you want to hammer the song into the heads of gamers while

they chase down zombies. Most licenses are in the $5,000 or $10,000
range for lesser-known songs and artists, and around $15,000 to $20,000
for big hits.
These licenses are usually for perpetuity, unless it’s an annual sportstype game (such as FIFA, NHL, or Madden NFL, which has a new
edition each year), in which case the licenses are three to ten years.
The only exception to at-fee video game licenses is for music-based
games, such as Just Dance, Guitar Hero (it’ll be back…), SingStar, and
karaoke games. These licenses allow the manufacturers to sell games with
music embedded in them, and also to sell downloads of songs (or packs
of songs) that can be added to the game. Because music is essential to
these products, the gaming companies are willing to pay a royalty for
every game sold. The speci cs of these licenses are con dential, so I’m
not free to publish them, but the deals are structured as advances against
either (a) a penny-rate royalty for each game unit sold and each
download, or (b) a percentage royalty, which is set aside for all the music
rights, then pro-rated among all the music involved in the sale or
download.
If the game company wants to use the song in a commercial for the
video game, you can sometimes get an additional $30,000 to several
hundred thousand dollars, depending on the importance of the song and
how it’s used.
8. Apps.
By apps in this section, I mean apps that use music, as opposed to apps
that simply let you access a music streaming service like Spotify, Apple
Music, or iHeartRadio—these latter ones are covered in the streaming
section.
The app deals are either a at fee (the amount varies hugely,
depending on how the music is used) or a share of revenue. More and
more, publishers are insisting on some kind of sharing.
As a general rule, the recordings and songs combined get about 50%
of the revenue. The publishers want half of that, though they sometimes
end up with more like 10% to 20% of the total revenue (meaning 10% to

20% of 100% of the money, which is 20% to 40% of the
recording/publishing 50% of the money).
Some apps don’t use the recordings; they have someone else play the
song, and in that case publishers can get up to 50% of the revenue,
depending on how important music is to the project. However, the
norm is closer to 30%.
As we discussed when we talked about recordings, the platform
selling the app (e.g., the iTunes or Android store) takes 30% o the top,
so these percentages are applied to the money that’s left over, which is
100% of what the app developer gets.
App deals are all short-term (one year to eighteen months), so the
label and publisher can renegotiate if the app is a success.
There are companies that make deals with the labels and publishers,
then license the tracks to developers. The idea is to make the process
simpler for everyone, especially app developers who have little patience
for these kinds of things. Examples are Songlily, FyrFly, Rumble sh,
Lickd, and others, and some of these companies license more than just
games. In the biz, these are called micro-licensing services, because they
deal in small (micro) transactions.
9. Bundled Services.
As we discussed on page 160, a bundled service is one that puts together
two or more products or services (Two for the Price of One!). There are
two avors of bundles: music bundles and mixed service bundles.
What the hell are those?
A music bundle is the sale of two or more music-only products
together, such as a download code when you buy a CD; these are
obviously disappearing.
For music bundles, you get your rate for each piece of product as if it
were sold separately, but they’ll want a discount since they’re getting a
price that’s less than what they’d get if they had sold them separately.
A mixed service bundle is the sale of a music product (like a streaming
service) along with a non-music service. For example, you get a music
streaming subscription when you buy Amazon Prime. Or you might get

music when you buy a device, like a phone, a voice-activated speaker, a
virtual reality (VR) headset, a singing toilet, etc. For a mixed service
bundle, you get the same percentages you get for streaming, computed
exactly the same way as the streaming royalties on page 240. The
di erence is that the percentages are applied to the money left after
deducting the price of the non-music element. For example, if you get a
streaming subscription when you buy a phone, you’d deduct the price of
a phone. But to keep that from being zero, there’s a per-subscriber
minimum, which for subscription bundles is currently 25¢. (Flip back to
page 240 if this is making your eyes spin.)
10. NFTs, Metaverse, and the like.
Sorry, not much data yet.
In the few music NFT deals I’ve seen, it’s a split of 50% to the artist,
25% to the label, and 25% to the publisher. But these have mostly dried
up.
The sync licenses for virtual concerts in the Metaverse have been for
low fees, but there are so few of them that I can’t give you any norm or
range yet.
Interesting side note: When publishers license mainstream media
these days, they try to carve out the Metaverse. The theory is that it’s
better to negotiate a price if and when there’s a speci c deal on the table.
That works well, unless of course you’re doing a license speci cally for
the Metaverse, which makes it harder to carve out…
11. Podcasts.
Podcast deals are small, and usually a at fee, essentially a transcription
license (the equivalent of a sync without video). Just like we discussed for
recordings, a lot of podcasters simply use music and don’t bother paying
anyone. But the publishers have been cracking down on this, so lately
there are more deals. The range is around $2,500 to $5,000 per song,
sometimes more for bigger songs and prominent uses.
12. Ringtones and Ringbacks.
Although they barely exist anymore, ringtones are permanent
downloads (see page 149 for what those are), and as we discussed on page

221, the compulsory mechanical royalty for ringtones is 24¢.
Ringbacks (also on the endangered species list) aren’t downloads
because they live on the server of the mobile provider and are played just
to the caller. So they’re considered a stream and paid at those rates (see
page 240).

SAMPLES
Congrats! You now know enough for me to tell you about samples. I couldn’t
have put this section earlier, because you rst needed to understand both
records and publishing. Now that you do, let’s boogie.
Sampling is the art of taking any sound (whether it’s a full recording, or just
a drum sound, synthesizer ri , voice, etc.) and making a digital copy, which you
then incorporate into your own masterpiece. Unless you’ve been living in a
moon colony, you know that every rapper on the planet samples massively from
other people’s works.
When the technology rst developed, everyone thought it was so cool that
they basically stole other people’s music without bothering to ask. Turns out
folks didn’t particularly appreciate that, and after a slew of lawsuits in the 1990s
that slammed record labels, everyone now handles sample licensing with white
velvet gloves. Indeed, companies won’t release a record containing samples
without assurances that the samples have been cleared (meaning properly
licensed), and you as an artist want the same thing. It’s you that’s left holding
the bag if there’s a lawsuit.
Clearing samples is a major pain in the butt. You have to get a license from
both the owner of the recording and the owner of the sampled song. But there’s
nothing in the law that requires anyone to let you use a sample of their work, so
a record company or publisher who’s been sampled can make you pull it o
your record. Or pay the equivalent of a ransom for the ruler of a small
kingdom.
And it gets worse. You can’t clear a sample until you nish the track—the
publisher and record company want to hear exactly how the sample is used
before they’ll tell you how much they want to charge, or whether they’ll let you

use it at any price. That puts you in the position of spending money to make a
record before you know whether you can use the sample in it. If you’re on a
tight schedule and/or if it ruins your song to take out the sample, you’re toast.
Sound like fun?
Suppose you don’t actually sample, but just duplicate the track by playing it
in the studio. Does that solve your problems? Well, only half. You’ve just
created what we call a replay. Replays eliminate the need to license the
recording, but you still need to license the song (unless you qualify for a fair
use, which we’ll discuss on page 336). As you’ll see, there’s no bright-line test of
whether something’s a fair use, so you can’t be sure that you’re okay. And it will
be expensive to prove you’re right if the other guy comes after you. So as a
practical matter, your label won’t put out your record and risk a lawsuit if you
include an uncleared sample. You’ll have to either get a license or ditch the
track.
If the record company gives you a license, it will want a royalty, generally in
the range of 2% to 8%. I know that’s a big range, but the amount depends on
the speci c situation: How extensively is the recording used? How
prominently? Did you sample an important song, or an obscure recording?
How desperate do they think you are?
Publishers always insist on owning a piece of the copyright and getting the
same share of income. Again, the percentage varies with how signi cantly the
sample is used in your record. If you’ve lifted an entire melody line, or their
track is the bed of your song, they might take 50% or more; for less signi cant
uses, the range is 10% to 30%.
Both the record company and the publisher will often ask for an advance
against their share, and the publishers sometimes want nonrecoupable money.
A particularly fun thing happens with multiple samples. I’ve seen several
situations like this: Your song has three samples. Publisher X wants 40%,
Publisher Y wants 40%, and Publisher Z wants 30%. If you do some quick
math, you’ll see that’s 110%. So every time you sell a record, you get to write a
check out of your own pocket. Nice, eh?
By the way, don’t assume the publishers will be the least bit sympathetic.
Their attitude is usually something like “Those other publishers are pigs. But my

share is really worth 40%, so go squeeze the other guy.”
Even when you get past all these hurdles, the publishers (and some record
companies) usually limit the usage of their sample to just your audio records
and single-song videos. Also, the publishers will co-administer their portion of
the composition (see page 312 for what co-administration is). This means they
can stop you from granting a particular license—for example, you couldn’t
license the song in a lm or a commercial without going back to the sample’s
record company and publisher and getting their consent. So when you sample,
you can easily lose control of your song.
The lesson in all this is that putting a sample in your record is serious
business. So think about it carefully. A moment of pleasure can mean a lifetime
of pain.
If you’re on the Fast Track, go to the Bonus Section on page 286. Everyone else,
onward…

FOREIGN SUBPUBLISHING
Except for the worldwide conglomerates, publishers don’t have branch o ces
in all territories. So how do they collect their money when you have fans in Abu
Dhabi?
Well, they do it by making deals with local publishers in each territory to
collect on their behalf. The local publisher is called a subpublisher.

Foreign Mechanicals
Before we talk about deals with the local publishers, you should know about an
unusual creature that lives in most territories outside the United States. This is
the mandatory mechanical rights collection society. It works like this:
Most countries have a mechanical rights collection organization (mostly
government mandated) that licenses all musical compositions (regardless of
who owns them) used by any record company in that territory. It’s similar to

the Harry Fox Agency (see page 237), except that it’s mandatory. It does exactly
what the MLC does for streaming (see page 249).
As noted on page 222, mechanical licenses are not issued on a per-song basis
outside the United States and Canada. Rather, the entire record is licensed for a
percentage of the revenue, regardless of the number of compositions. This
greatly simpli es the process of putting all the monies through one place.
So the local society collects mechanical royalties from the record companies,
holds them for as long as they can get away with it (they can earn interest on
these monies and keep the interest for themselves), and nally sends the monies
to the appropriate publishers. Just like ASCAP and BMI, they deduct their
operating expenses before they distribute income, but they also deduct some
things we don’t have here, like cultural and social deductions and non-musicrelated investments. And these other deductions can be signi cant, meaning
10% to 20% or more. Frankly, the societies are a bit on the murky side about all
this, and their practices have stirred up concern in the last number of years. The
mood of reform is in the air, so we’ll see how it plays out.
At any rate, the societies now have all this money left after expenses. How do
they know who to pay? Under this system, just like MLC, each local publisher
les a claim with the organization, saying it owns a particular song. It can either
be a claim for the entire song, or a percentage share if the rights are split among
several publishers in that territory. If a claim is contested (and in some territories
even if it isn’t), the publisher is required to le proof of its claim, such as a copy
of the contract with the U.S. publisher.

Foreign Performances
As we discussed on page 230, all foreign territories have some sort of
performing rights society, usually only one per country, and usually
government mandated. These societies pay the publisher’s share of performance
monies to local subpublishers. They pay the writer’s share to the writer’s PRO
(which in turn pays the writer), again keeping these monies out of the
publishers’ hands (as we discussed on page 231).

If there’s no foreign subpublisher, the publisher’s share will ultimately wind
its way back to the U.S. publisher through the American PRO. However, it
takes substantially longer, and it’s worth paying the subpublisher a piece so you
can get it earlier. Also, the subpublisher has “boots on the ground” in each
territory, so they can make sure the songs are properly registered, and also use
their relationships to solve any local problems.
How much do subpublishers get paid for all this? Well…

Subpublisher Charges
Subpublishers typically retain anywhere from 10% to 50% of the monies earned,
with the vast majority of deals being from 15% to 25%. The contracts are
actually written the opposite way, stating that the subpublisher collects all
monies and remits 75% to 85% of it to the U.S. publisher. The shorthand
industry expression of these deals is “75/25” or “85/15,” referring to the
percentages kept by each party. (Oh, and you don’t pronounce the “slash.” You
just say, “Seventy ve, twenty ve.”)
By the way, I heard of one deal where the local subpublisher kept no
percentage whatsoever of the earnings (i.e., they remitted 100%). Can you
gure out why anyone would do this? See page 284 for the answer. (You
haven’t learned about part of the answer yet.)

Covers
It’s customary for the local publisher to get an increased percentage for cover
records. As we discussed, a cover record, also called a cover, is a recording by an
artist other than the original artist, and in this case, it means a recording of a
U.S. composition by a local artist. The subpublisher usually gets 40% to 50% of
the earnings from cover recordings (meaning it remits 50% to 60%). In other
words, they keep more money on covers as an incentive for them to beat the
bushes.
When you make a subpublishing deal, be sure to limit the subpublisher’s
increased percentage to the earnings from the cover recording only. If you

don’t, you’ll decrease your money on the U.S. version when the local
publisher’s nephew records the song.
By the way, you should try to make sure that all covers have a di erent title.
Since it’s usually in the local language, that’s not an issue. But sometimes it’s in
the original language, particularly in an English-speaking territory.
If the cover has the same title as the original, it can get di cult to sort
through which version earned what in the way of mechanicals and
performances. Over the last few years, things have gotten better in this area
because of metadata (as discussed on page 72, metadata is the information
electronically embedded in each song le, and it identi es the song and writer
along with a bunch of label junk, so everyone can easily tell a cover from the
original). Nonetheless, it’s still better to have di erent title.

Performance Monies
A number of subpublishers want a bigger percentage of performance royalties
than they do for other monies. For example, they may keep 25% of all monies
except performances, but keep 50% of performances. Why?
Here’s their argument:
Assuming the subpublisher gets 25% of all earnings other than
performances, for every dollar of earnings it gets 25¢. The 75¢ paid back to the
U.S. publisher includes both the publisher’s share and the writer’s share (as did
of course the dollar paid to them in the rst place), and thus their percentage
applied to the total writer/publisher combination. All cool.
On performances, however, remember that the writer’s share is paid to the
U.S. performing rights society, and not to the local subpublisher (see page 265).
This means that, instead of collecting the full $1 of performance monies, the
subpublisher only gets 50¢ (the publisher’s share).
Here’s a chart:
Total Writer/Publisher
Earnings
Amount Paid to Subpublisher

Mechanicals
$1.00

Performances
$1.00

$1.00

$ .50

Subpublisher’s 25% Share
Percentage of Dollar Earned

$ .25
25%

(the other $.50 is paid to the
writer directly by society)
$ .125
12.5%

Accordingly, subpublishers argue, they’re really only getting 12.5% of the
performance dollar. Thus they should have 50% of performance monies, so
they can get 25% of the full performance dollar and be in the same position as
they are with other monies. This 50% equals 25¢ (50% of the 50¢ publisher’s
share of performance monies), or 25% of the total writer/publisher
performance dollar, meaning the publisher and writer each get 50¢.
This reasoning, while clever and not without merit, usually gives way to
sheer bargaining power. If the subpublisher has enough bargaining power,
they’ll pull it o . Otherwise, the U.S. publisher simply says no, or compromises
somewhere in between.

Advances
It’s customary for subpublishers to pay the U.S. publisher an advance against
their earnings. This is basically a banking transaction—if the U.S. publisher’s
catalog has a track record, the subpublisher pays an advance based on historical
earnings. It will vary, of course, with the size of the territory and the size of the
catalog. The range of advances is anywhere from zero (for a new artist or a so-so
older catalog) to millions of dollars for major catalogs in major territories.
Again, as with all other rules, there are exceptions. For example, if the
publisher controls a new artist whose record is doing extremely well in the
United States and the local subpublisher is excited and thinks it will work in
their territory, the advance can get driven up, despite the lack of historical
earnings.
Advances are also a ected by the currency exchange rates. When the dollar is
weak, high U.S. dollar advances are relatively easy to come by. And of course
the opposite is true when the dollar gets stronger. In other words, the same
number of English pounds equals more or fewer dollars at any given time,

depending on the current exchange rate. When it equals more, you can get a
larger dollar advance.
A deal with no advance is known as a collection deal, meaning the
subpublisher merely collects on behalf of the U.S. publisher. Also, if there is no
advance, the percentage kept by the subpublisher is lower, usually in the 10% to
15% range.

“At Source”
If your subpublishing deal isn’t directly with the publisher in a particular
territory (for example, you make a deal with a major U.S. publisher for all of
Europe), one of the most important points to have in your subpublishing
agreement is a requirement that all monies be computed “at source.” We
touched on this in the context of streaming, on page 95, but since the fun and
games were invented by old-time publishing rip-o wizards, let’s take a closer
look.
Assume you have a deal with a U.S. publisher for Europe. If your deal is “at
source,” it means the percentage you get must be based on the earnings in the
country where they are earned, which is the source. For example, if you have an
85/15 deal at source in Germany, and $1 is earned there, you get 85¢. If you
don’t say “at source,” you’ll pay 15% to the local subpublisher in Germany, then
another percentage to your U.S. publisher when the money comes back to the
United States.
An extreme example of why your deal should be “at source” is this scam,
which has been around long enough to have a beard like Dumbledore:
A subpublisher in the United Kingdom makes a 75/25 deal with a U.S.
publisher for all the territories of Europe. The subpublisher in Germany
(owned by the UK publisher) collects a dollar, keeps 50¢ as its collection fee,
then pays 50¢ to the UK publisher. The 50¢ received in the United Kingdom is
then split between the U.S. publisher and the UK publisher.
Here’s a play by play:
Earnings in Germany
Less: German Company’s 50% Share

$1.00
– .50

Amount Remitted to UK
Less: UK Company’s 25% Share
AMOUNT REMITTED TO U.S. PUBLISHER

$ .50
– .125
$.375

It doesn’t take a genius to see that the $1 earned at source (in this case,
Germany, where the actual earnings were generated) gets dwindled radically
before it nds its way into your pocket. And your 75% deal is in reality only
37.5% (you only got 37.5¢ out of the $1 earned in Germany).
This hustle is no longer played in the shadows, but right up front. If you
don’t say the deal is “at source,” the contract will say that the publisher can
deduct both the foreign subpublisher’s share and its own share before paying
you.
If your publisher doesn’t own the foreign a liate, the local publisher’s share
doesn’t go into their pocket, so you don’t have the same argument. But you can
argue that the U.S. publisher’s share has to include the foreign publisher’s fee.
In other words, if the U.S. publisher gets 25%, it could pay 15% to a local
publisher and keep the other 10%, so in e ect you’re getting 75% “at source.” If
you can’t do that, then in the worst case you should limit what the
subpublishers can charge. For example, put in your contract that they can’t
deduct more than, say, 10% to 20% before sending the dough back to the
United States. The result of this push-pull depends on bargaining power.
When you look through the smoke and mirrors, this is only a matter of
dollars: How much do you get, and how much does the publisher keep? But
make sure you address this issue directly. Either the deal is “at source” or it’s not;
say so from the get-go.

Translation/Adaptation Shares
An interesting quirk of subpublishing deals is the translator or adaptor share.
If your song is popular, many territories will want to release a version with lyrics
in the language of that territory. This all sounds innocent enough, but there are
some surprises:

1. First of all, under local society rules, the local lyricist automatically gets a
share of royalties. Most societies require that the lyricist get about onesixth of gross (meaning combined writer and publisher shares) for
mechanicals, and one-sixth of the writer’s share only for performance
royalties. The societies pay this share directly to the lyricist, so you don’t
really have anything to say about it.
2. Subpublishers, naturally, want to take this share completely from your
royalties. If you have su cient bargaining power, you may be able to
muscle them into absorbing it out of their percentage. Remember, they
often get an increased percentage of cover recordings, like 60%. As their
percentage decreases, however, so does the likelihood of your making
them eat it. So, more commonly, the translator’s percentage comes o
the top, which means you pay your share of it and the subpublisher pays
theirs. In other words, if a dollar comes in and the translator gets 16%,
you split 84¢ with the subpublisher. That means, if your deal pays you
60% of the earnings from covers, you’re absorbing 60% of the
translator’s share, and the subpublisher eats the other 40%.
3. Always require that the translation be registered separately with the
society (since it will have a foreign title, this isn’t so di cult), and also
require the publisher to make sure the translator doesn’t get paid on the
English-language version. This can be done in most territories, but some
(notably Germany) insist on paying the translator on the original
composition no matter what you do (in the case of Germany, however,
the translator gets only a piece of mechanicals and not other income).
The upshot is that you should have the absolute right to approve whether the
subpublisher can authorize a local translation. Apart from the fact that a
translation takes money out of your pocket, you want to be sure you like what
they’re doing. Make them send you an English translation of the lyrics for
approval before they can record. If you don’t, your ballad may nd itself
associated with a number of shady topics, drugs, politics, etc.

The Black Box

Remember, as we discussed on page 264, that the societies collect mechanicals
for all songs, not just those registered. But they only pay out for the songs that
are registered. If you recall our discussion of this issue with the MLC, you’ve
probably gured out that there may be some songs not claimed by any local
publisher. And you’re right—there are always unclaimed songs. For example,
through sheer inadvertence, a U.S. publisher may not have a subpublishing deal
in a particular territory. Or maybe the rights are disputed in the United States,
so there are no deals with a foreign publisher.
These unclaimed monies are called black-box monies. In some countries
(notably Germany, Italy, Spain, France, and Holland), if the funds aren’t
claimed after a set period of time (usually three years), they’re paid to the local
publishers. Each publisher gets a portion of them, based on the ratio that its
earnings bear to the total earnings of the society, and also based on seniority. So
if a publisher earned 100,000 drapkes and the society collected 1,000,000
drapkes, it might receive 100,000/1,000,000, or 10%, of the black-box monies,
and perhaps another 3% because it’s been around for twenty years. This can be a
substantial source of additional revenue, and the local publisher keeps it all
because the monies aren’t earned by any particular compositions.
When you get into the “major leagues,” you may be able to get a portion of
the black-box money. The usual formula is to take a proportionate amount of
the black box, based on the ratio that your songs’ earnings bear to the total
earnings of that subpublisher. For example, if your songs earned a total of
$200,000 for the subpublisher, and its total earnings were $1 million, you
would get 20% of the black-box monies, because your $200,000 is 20% of its $1
million total. The publisher would deduct its percentage from that and pay you
the balance.
In recent years, the societies have begun allowing electronic registration,
which enormously simpli es the process, and makes it easier to register
compositions around the world. Because of this, most songs are now properly
registered, and the amount of money in the black box is dropping. But it’s still
around.

PRINTED MUSIC
Printed music historically meant paper (remember that?), but today it means
much more. The traditional print market was sheet music (printed music of a
single song—the kind you stu inside your piano bench) and folios (which are
collections of songs, such as Greatest Hits of the Nineties, The Complete Led
Zeppelin, The David Hasselhoﬀ Songbook, etc.). Collections of songs by a
number of di erent artists are called mixed folios. Another type is a matching
folio, which has all the songs of a particular album (i.e., it “matches” the
album). Matching folios are usually printed with the album artwork on the
cover and various posed candid shots of the artist inside.

Royalties
The following royalties are what’s paid to a publisher for physical (meaning
printed on paper) print rights. We’ll hit digital print in the next section.
For single-song physical sheet music, the standard royalty is 20% of the
marked retail price (currently most single-song sheet music has a $4.95 retail
price, so the publisher gets about 99¢).
Royalties on folios are 10% to 12.5% of the marked retail price, and the
current marked selling price of most folios is $24.95. A personality folio is one
that has the picture of the performing artist plastered all over it, such as Stevie
Wonder’s Greatest Hits. (A matching folio [see the previous section for what
that is] is also a personality folio, but limited to one album.) For a personality
folio, there’s an additional royalty of 5% of the marked retail selling price for use
of the name and likeness of the artist, and it goes to the artist (who may or may
not be the same person as the songwriter). If the songwriter is also the artist, the
publisher may be entitled to the extra 5% if their deal with the writer includes
name and likeness rights. Try to keep it for yourself in your deal.
Unless the folio represents the selected works of a particular songwriter and
only one publisher, it’ll have songs written and/or published by a number of
di erent people. Thus, the royalties are pro-rated. For example, if there are
twenty compositions in the folio, and you own ten, you would get 10/20 (one-

half) of the 10% to 12.5% royalty. When you negotiate a pro-ration provision,
be sure to insist that the royalty can only be pro-rated on the basis of copyrighted,
royalty-bearing works in the folio. Otherwise your royalty gets reduced by
“Mary Had a Little Lamb” and “The Star-Spangled Banner,” even though the
printer isn’t paying anyone for these songs.
The balance of print music consists of things like instructional music (such as
putting your songs in How to Play the Nose Flute), marching band
arrangements, choir arrangements, dance arrangements, etc. The royalty for
these is generally 10% of retail unless it’s a folio of lyrics only, in which case the
royalty is 5% to 7.5%.
Print rights also include reprints of lyrics in books, magazines, greeting
cards, etc. For books, if it’s just a snippet of the lyrics, the rate is around 1¢ per
unit, with a $200 minimum. For more extensive reprints, or a use that’s
signi cant to the story, the per-unit rate can climb to about 4¢, with an advance
based on anticipated sales—for major book authors, the advance can go over
$100,000.
The fee to use lyrics in lms varies with the kind of use. If they’re used as the
title of the lm, it could be in the range of $5,000 to $10,000, sometimes much
more for a major song. If the script is based on the lyrics of the song, there can
be a really substantial fee and even a pro t participation in the lm. If the lm
includes the song as well as the lyrics, the sync license will include the lm
company’s right to use the lyrics in closed captioning and subtitles in other
languages.
For paper greeting cards (we’ll discuss digital e-cards in a minute), the
publishers get the greater of a penny rate (usually 12.5¢ to 15¢) or a percentage
of the wholesale price (usually 5% to 8%). If it’s a greeting card that actually
plays the song, publishers also insist that their royalty can’t be less than what’s
paid for the recording.
Reprints of lyrics on clothing run from 8% to 11% of wholesale, depending
on whether the goods are sold in high-end stores or through a mass
merchandiser (meaning a store like Walmart or other places that sell at deeply
discounted prices in a no-frills environment). The mass merchandiser’s sales are

at the lower royalties, around 6% to 8% of wholesale, because the discounted
prices mean there’s a thinner pro t margin.
Advertising uses (such as printing lyrics in magazines, newspapers, and on
billboards) are at fees, and can run $25,000 or more for major uses.
Traditional lyric reprints on inserts in physical albums are customarily free.
However, as physical disappears, lyric videos are today’s equivalent of lyric
reprints. As we’ll discuss on page 283, publishers try to get more money for
these.

Digital Print Rights
The most direct transition of traditional print to digital media are sites like
Musicnotes.com and SheetMusicPlus.com, which sell downloadable sheet
music. That is truly the equivalent of (and a substitute for) paper sheet music.
Also, sites like Tonara and Chromatik have apps for tablets and smartphones
that have cool things like ticking metronomes and pages that turn in sync. The
cost of these products is about the same as physical print music, which is
currently $4.95 per song. To license these rights, publishers get 50% of the
income—a big jump from the 20% they get on physical print.
A much broader use in the digital world is posting lyrics online without the
music. These are places like Genius, LyricFind, and Musixmatch. The lyrics are
usually available free to users, because the sites have advertising up the yin-yang,
though some sites have subscribers. Interestingly, the largest purveyor of lyrics is
Google, who licenses the right to display lyrics in their searches. Turns out lyrics
are one of the most searched topics… apparently well ahead of “snail collectors.”
For allowing sites to reprint the lyrics, publishers get about 50% of the
advertising revenue, often with a minimum amount per view, and (if it’s
subscription based) a minimum amount per subscriber (the PSM concept we
discussed on page 144). However, I’m told Google pays a at fee per year for
lyric search rights. A number of lyric sites aren’t licensed at all, though the
publishers have recently been more aggressive about shutting them down.
There are also lyric videos, which we’ll discuss on page 283.

E-cards are those cutesy-wutesy pictures of snow falling on sleighs while
music plays in the background, and they’re another form of digital print. For
these, the publisher gets 5% to 8% of the retail price, with a minimum of 10¢ to
15¢ per unit.
Music instruction and notation apps (such as one that scrolls along as you
play the song), are also digital print rights. The deals range from 15% to 25%,
depending on how interactive the app is, and whether it’s really educational or
just entertainment. If the recording isn’t used, the norm is more like 50%.
That’s because the publishers know the app would have to pay 60% for both the
recording and the lyrics if they did use the recording, so they give a discount to
50% if they don’t. That incentivizes the app developers to not use the recording,
and of course makes the publisher more money.
Unlike physical print deals, digital deals are non-exclusive, meaning the
publisher can license the same rights to multiple users. This is a big shift in the
industry. Historically, setting up a printing company, buying the presses, hiring
a sales and warehouse force, and taking the inventory risk (which of course
doesn’t exist with digital) was so expensive that the printers wouldn’t put out a
particular song catalog unless they had it exclusively. The publishers were ne
with this for two reasons: (1) they didn’t want to invest in setting up a print
company, and (2) by making long-term exclusive deals, the publishers could get
a good-size advance from the print company. Obviously as the physical print
world shrivels, so does the potential revenue and therefore the amount of
advance they can get.

Term
Licenses for print music are for limited periods of time, usually three to ve
years. The exceptions are licenses of lyrics for books, movies, and things like
that, where they run for the life of copyright.
As we just discussed, these licenses are nonexclusive, except for physical
goods.
Physical printed goods have some other peculiarities, namely what happens
to the stu at the end of the term? Certainly they can’t manufacture any more

inventory, but can they sell what they have?
Normally these licenses give the printer a right to sell their existing physical
inventory for a period of six to twelve months after the term expires. These sello rights are non-exclusive (meaning someone else can sell the same materials at
the same time). At the end of the six to twelve months, they have to trash
anything left over, or donate it to charity. For mixed folios (because they’re so
much more expensive, and also because there are a lot of other writers
involved), the printers try not to have any time limit on their sell-o rights, and
in fact want the right to keep manufacturing them.
When you make these deals, make sure there’s no stockpiling, dumping, or
distress sales. Stockpiling is where the printer manufactures eight quadrillion
units right before the end of the term, so that they have tons of your inventory
to sell after the term. (Your new printer won’t like it if the market is already
ooded with the same books it’s trying to sell.) You stop this by saying the
printer can only manufacture enough to meet their reasonably anticipated
needs during the term.
Dumping and distress sales mean the printer sells your inventory at less than
customary wholesale prices. Way less. You don’t want this because, if they end
up with a ton of goods left over, they’ll blow them out at whatever rock-bottom
price they can get. (Since they have to destroy or donate everything they don’t
sell, they use the age-old theory that it’s better to get something than nothing.)
This practice, shall we say, “perturbs” your new printer, who is trying to sell the
same stu at full price. You solve this by saying your materials can be sold only
through normal retail channels, at normal wholesale prices.

CONTROLLED COMPOSITION CLAUSES
Congratulations! Two times!
Congratulations Number One: You now know enough to talk about
controlled composition clauses in record deals. Just like samples, you need to
understand both record deals and publishing to get these concepts.
Congratulations Number Two: Most of the provisions in these clauses are
becoming less and less relevant. So you don’t need to waste nearly the amount

of time I did to learn this crap.
The controlled composition clause (also known to its buddies as a
controlled comp clause, although it has no “buddies” except record
companies) puts a limit on how much the company has to pay for each song (as
opposed to the recordings).
This clause used to be one of the most signi cant provisions in your record
deal. That was because it reduced your mechanical royalties, and if you’re a
songwriter, mechanicals are paid even when your record deal is unrecouped
(unlike your record royalties, as you know). But it’s not nearly as important
today for several reasons:
1. The Copyright Act says that digital downloads created under record
deals made after June 22, 1995, can’t be subject to a controlled comp
clause. So downloads are paid at a full rate, no matter what.
2. While these clauses still apply to physical goods, those have obviously
taken a massive nosedive. So reducing the rate on physical isn’t nearly as
signi cant as it once was.
3. But the real reason these clauses have faded is because streaming
mechanicals are paid by the DSPs (not your record company), so the
record companies no longer care how much you get.
Still, there’s a controlled comp clause in every record deal. The good news is
that companies don’t ght a lot about the mechanical rate limits in these
provisions because they’re really just about physical goods. So if you don’t win
any other points in your deal, you should be able to score here.
Nonetheless, let’s look at these clauses because (a) there’s more to them than
the cap on mechanical rates, and (b) I had to learn this junk, so why shouldn’t
you at least get a taste of it? (I’m not really feeling the sympathy here…)
Okay, enough snark. At least for now.
A threshold question in this area is the de nition of which songs are covered
by your controlled comp clause. The songs subject to the clause are called
controlled compositions, and are de ned as songs that are written, owned, or

controlled by the artist (in whole or in part). However, it’s usually written more
broadly than that, and includes:
1. Any song in which the artist has an income or other interest. This means
that, even if the artist doesn’t own or control the song, if he or she wrote
it or otherwise gets a piece of its earnings, it’s a controlled composition.
2. The de nition often includes compositions owned or controlled by the
producer of the recordings. You really have little, if any, control over a
producer’s publishing, and thus you should try hard to knock this
provision out. It’s hard to get rid of this, except at superstar levels, but do
your best.
Before we go into the detail of mechanical limits, let’s hit the parts of the
controlled comp clause that go beyond records. These provisions deal with
things like audiovisual works, websites, use of lyrics, advertising and promotion,
and other stu that’s still very relevant. The labels of course want all these rights
for free, claiming they’re “promotional” for your records, which they are. But
the line between what’s “promotional” and what’s “commercial” is getting
blurred these days, and the publishers want to get paid. For example, what
about lyric videos and behind-the-scenes footage (like in the studio or backstage
at a concert)? Those are promotional, but they can also generate revenue when
they go online and have ads around them. If you can exclude those rights from
your controlled comp clause and negotiate separately, that’s awesome.
Otherwise, if you have to give your record company the rights, try to get paid
something for it. If you have a publisher, they can help you with this.
Now to the limits.
Companies limit mechanical royalties for controlled comps on physical
product in two ways:
1. Rate per Song.
You may remember that the statutory rate in the United States is now
12¢ per song. Up until the 1976 Copyright Act, the statutory had been
2¢ for many years. The ink was hardly dry on the 1976 Act, which raised

the rate to 2.75¢, when the record companies hit on the idea that they
should require artists to license controlled compositions at 75% of the
statutory rate. (Controlled composition clauses existed before the 1976
Copyright Act, but they didn’t reduce the rate below statutory.)
Companies still try for this 75% rate with most new artists, but it’s
gotten easier to push this up to 100% as physical sales fall. Even the
biggest superstars have some form of controlled composition clause,
although the “limit” is 100% of the minimum statutory rate.
2. Rate per Album/EP/Single.
There is also a limit of ten or eleven times the single-song rate for each
album, ve times for an EP, and two times for a single.
These issues are more complex than they seem. So let’s take a deeper
look.

MAXIMUM RATE PER SONG
Because the maximum album rate is a multiple of the single-song rate, let’s rst
look at how they treat each song. Here’s the skinny:
The rst argument is to make sure you get 100% of statutory, rather than
their standard, o -the-shelf “75% of statutory.” As I said, this is getting
considerably easier, but if you get a stickler at the label, try to get the percentage
over 75%—anywhere over 75% would be nice. If you can’t, one compromise is
to ask for an escalation on later albums. For example, you might have a 75% rate
on album 1, 85% on album 2, and 100% on album 3. Or another possibility is
an escalation based on revenue (calculated in the same way we talked about for
escalating record royalties on page 109).
Minimum Statutory Rate. The limit per composition is based on the
minimum statutory rate. This means that all compositions are treated as if they
are ve minutes or less in duration, regardless of their actual playing time—in
other words, there is no additional payment for lengthy compositions as there
would be under a compulsory license. For example, the current statutory rate

for a seven-minute song is 16.1¢ (see page 221 for why), but under these
provisions, you’re only paid 12¢ if you get 100% of statutory, or 8¢ (75% of 12¢)
if you have a 75% rate.
Changes in Statutory Rate. As we discussed, the statutory rate can be
changed by the Copyright Royalty Board, as happened in 2023, and thereafter
it adjusts based on the CPI (see page 221). But controlled composition clauses
set a rate that doesn’t change. Thus, even if you get a full statutory rate in your
deal, it’s normally locked to the statutory rate on a particular date, and there’s
no increase if the statutory rate later escalates. This is tough to change, even for
superstars.
The companies lock into the statutory rate in e ect on one of these three
dates: (a) the date of recording, (b) the date the recording is delivered to the
company, or (c) the date of rst release of the recording.
The general thinking (and historically this has been correct) is that the latest
possible date is best for you—the statutory rate has never gone down, and thus
the longer you wait, the more likely it may go up.
Free Goods, Real and Imagined. The controlled composition clause will
say that you get no mechanicals on free goods (see page 84 for what free goods
are). Nothing wrong with that; the company isn’t getting paid for them, so they
don’t pay mechanicals. Some companies also frame this as a discount of the
PPD, rather than free goods. In other words, if they take 10% of the PPD to
incentivize dealers to buy them, then 10% of the sales would be deemed “free”
and not bear mechanicals. (There are also reduced mechanicals for the deeper
discounts of mid-price and budget, which we’ll discuss separately.)
Multiple Uses. Controlled composition clauses say that if a particular song is
used more than once on the same record, you only get paid as if it were used
once.
Short Uses. The companies don’t want to pay for uses under ninety seconds,
such as intros (a little snippet before another song), interludes (a short piece

between songs), or outros (which means either [a] a little snippet after a song,
or [b] a belly-button that’s not an “innie”).
Reduced Rates. The company typically asks for a 75% discount on the agreed
rate for anything other than sales through normal retail channels, and things
like mid-price and budget (see page 168 for what those are). Note, if you have a
75% of statutory rate on top-line product, you’ll get a reduced percentage of
that already reduced rate. For example, if you had a 75% rate on top-line, and a
75% rate on mid-price records, you’d only get 56.25% (75% of your 75% rate).
Public Domain Arrangements. If a song is an arrangement of a public
domain composition, the record company doesn’t want to pay you for it. Your
argument is that songs like “Scarborough Fair” were extremely successful public
domain songs, and if you’re brilliant enough to have this concept, you should
be paid. (Sorry to use an old song, but I can’t think of anything more current.)
The typical compromise is that you get a proportionate royalty for public
domain material, in the same ratio that the performing rights organization (see
page 230 for what those are) pays for the composition involved. In other words,
if ASCAP pays you 50% of normal performance monies for the song (because
they think your new contributions are worth 50%, and no one is paid for the
public domain part), you get 50% of the mechanical rate. Everyone routinely
accepts this, and a lot of forms will say this at the outset to save time.
Non-controlled Songs. This is a particularly nasty piece of business. The rate
limits may be imposed not just on controlled compositions, but on every
composition in the album. Most companies don’t do this, but there’s still a few
out there. If you’re using what we call outside songs (meaning songs that
aren’t controlled compositions), this may be impossible to deliver—the owner
of the outside songs will insist on being paid in full. Remember, you can’t force
an owner to license you for a rst use, and even if the song was used before, the
owner doesn’t have to take less than the full statutory rate (they can tell you
either to drop the song or get a compulsory license at the full statutory rate).
The only way to pay less for outside songs is to either threaten (“We’ll drop your

song if you don’t reduce the rate”) or grovel (“Please, I’m just a poor little
singer”). But if you’re dealing with major songwriters, unless your records
generate truckloads of money, the publisher will tell you to blow it out your
kazoo.
The real problem is not whether you can deliver the outside song at a
reduced rate, because the record companies know there’s a lot of times when
you can’t. The real problem is how the company punishes you when you don’t.
Essentially, if they have to pay more than your contractual limit because of
outside songs, the company carves the excess out of your hide (meaning it
reduces the mechanicals going to you, and if that’s not enough, it goes hunting
for more).

Canada
There’s no compulsory mechanical rate in Canada. Instead there’s a contractual
agreement between the Canadian Recording Industry Association and a
number of major publishers setting the “industry royalty rate.” Currently it’s
8.3¢ for the rst ve minutes, plus 1.66¢ for each additional minute or fraction
thereof (all in Canadian pennies).
So now you’re a virtuoso of the single-song limit. You’re ready to conquer:

MAXIMUM RATE PER ALBUM, EPS, AND SINGLES
The maximum-per-album concept also applies to EPs and singles, but for
simplicity, I’m only talking about albums here. EPs and singles are exactly the
same computations, except that the limit is usually ve times the single-song rate
for EPs, and two times for singles.
Standard Clause. All controlled composition clauses impose a limit on the
total mechanicals for each album, which is called a cap. It’s usually ten times
75% of the minimum statutory rate (or ten times the full rate if your per-song
rate isn’t reduced). This is known as a ten times rate, meaning you get ten

times the single-song rate. Note this is an added restriction, which is
independent of the per-song limit. In other words, you must deliver the label a
license for each song at the speci ed single-song rate, no matter what the total
album limit, but you can’t exceed the total album limit no matter what you pay
for each individual song. This is to keep you from delivering, for example,
fourteen songs at a 75% rate, which totals more than the company is willing to
pay, even though you haven’t exceeded your per-song limit.
Just like single songs, the album limits are based on a multiple of the
minimum statutory rate (the rate for songs ve minutes and under), as we
discussed on page 278.
Nowadays, it’s not uncommon for albums to have anywhere from eleven to
fourteen songs. So you should always try for more than a ten-times limit. As we
discussed, this is really only a CD/vinyl issue, and since that’s a very small part of
the business, it’s been a lot easier to get eleven or twelve times the full statutory
rate, occasionally a little more.
Wherever you end up, it’s pretty easy to slide right over the limit. So lemme
show you what happens when you do.
Just for consistency in the examples, I’m going to assume that you have a
maximum album rate of ten times 100% of the 12¢ statutory rate, meaning
$1.20. Under the standard clause, if you deliver more than ten songs, the excess
reduces the mechanical royalties on songs you control. For example, if you
deliver twelve songs that are all controlled, the ten-times cap means you only get
$1.20 for all the songs. In other words, each song earns $1.20 divided by twelve,
or 10¢ per song (instead of 12¢ per song, which is what you’d get if there were
no cap).
Special Packages/Bonus Tracks. Some artists do special packages exclusively
for certain retailers (like Target or Walmart). In exchange for this exclusive
product, the retailer gives the product a push. For example, they feature your
album in their brochure, give your product better placement in the store, or
discount your record if the customer buys a pepper grinder in the shape of a
bowling pin (maybe not the last one).

To make these packages “special,” they always have more songs than the
normal album (usually two or three tracks that we call bonus tracks). The
problem is, unless you wrote all the songs by yourself, the folks who wrote those
extra songs have this habit of wanting to be paid mechanicals for them, but your
contract limits the mechanicals the company has to pay out so there’s no room
to pay them without reducing your mechanicals.
Normally this is worked out at the time, but with enough clout, you can get
something in your deal. Of course, as the writer, you want to be paid in full for
the extra songs, but second place is that the company can’t reduce your
mechanicals on the original (not bonus) album because of the extras. For
example, if you had ten times full stat for the normal album, and they add two
tracks, maybe you don’t get paid mechanicals on the extra tracks, even though
you wrote them, but you won’t be reduced by third parties who do get paid on
them.
If your clause doesn’t cover special packages, be sure to raise these issues as
soon as there’s talk of extra tracks. If not, the controlled composition clause will
clip your ponytail into a buzz cut.
Multiple Albums. While these are mostly dead except for box sets (as we
discussed on page 119), controlled composition clauses don’t distinguish
between normal albums and multiple albums. If you don’t raise the issue,
you’ll have a ten-song mechanical limit on a multiple album that has twenty or
more songs. As noted earlier, all the economics of a box set are negotiated
separately, so you won’t likely get much in your normal deal for this. Just be
sure mechanicals are part of the discussion if you do a box set, because these are
mostly physical product, where this clause is alive and well.

Videos
Every controlled composition clause requires you to license your songs for use
in videos. There are two aspects:
1. Single-song videos.

Single-song videos that play on YouTube, Vevo, etc., are considered
promotional, because they’re free to the consumer and help drive your
career. So every controlled comp clause requires you to let the company
put these out.
While it’s customary to give the label a free single-song video license,
you should get paid by the DSPs (as we discussed, the DSPs pay
publishers to stream your videos). The record companies of course have
no problem with you getting paid by the DSPs because it doesn’t cost
them anything. However, they’ll want a free license to stream your
videos on the label website.
The labels also want a free sync license to put your music in a single
song video (see page 252 for what a sync license is). Note that sync rights
are separate from the right to stream; sync is a fee to duplicate your
music into the video, as opposed to a fee for streaming the video, which
is a distribution right. Currently, the custom is to give a free sync license
under your controlled comp clause, since you’re getting paid for the
streaming.
Another issue concerns lyric videos, which not surprisingly are
videos that show the lyrics on-screen while the song is playing. Most
publishers want an additional royalty for lyric videos, arguing that the
sync license which allows labels to put your song in the video is separate
from a license that lets them reprint the lyrics (which is true). The labels
ght back ercely. Your controlled comp clause says they get lyrics for
free, and results vary with clout. More often than not, you won’t get
anything extra for the lyric video, but if there is an additional fee, it’s a
couple of percentage points in addition to the normal rate.
2. Everything besides single-song videos.
These are things like concert videos, TV appearances, and compilations
of single-song videos.
The rate for streaming these videos is the same as single-song videos.
The rates for physical and downloads of audiovisual materials still make
their way into your controlled comp clause, even though everything

besides streaming is drying up like a forgotten potted fern. But here they
are:
For DVDs and video downloads, independent publishers (those not
subject to a controlled composition clause, who can charge what the
market will bear), usually get in the range of 8¢ to 15¢ per song, though
some get a percentage of PPD (8% to 10% or so). Also, there’s almost
always a 10,000–15,000 unit guarantee, meaning, for example, if you
get 12¢ per unit and a 10,000 unit guarantee, you would get a $1,200
advance (12¢ × 10,000 units). In addition, publishers often get
something called a xing fee, which is a nonrecoupable payment for
ﬁxing the song in the video (basically, a sync license). These fees range
from $250 to $500 per song.
You won’t get market rate for these uses in a controlled comp clause,
but you should be able to get paid. The common compromise is around
8¢ per song if it’s a penny rate, or 8% if it’s a percentage of PPD. You
virtually never get a xing fee.
These are the rates as I write this; given that the audio-only
mechanical rate has recently gone up to 12¢, these may change as well.
But then again they might not, because there’s almost no market for
DVDs and video downloads. I mean, would you want one?

Other Freebies
The other freebie that the label will want under your controlled comp clause is
the right to use your song in advertising and promoting your record and on
their website.

Producers
When you hire a producer who is also a writer, you’ll discover that the major
producers don’t want to be bound by the rates in your controlled composition
clause but rather insist on a full rate for their songs, no matter what. This used

to be a big deal, but since it’s now only physical and downloads, the companies
are more exible.
If you have enough clout, or if the producer doesn’t, you can get them to go
along with your controlled comp rates completely. Even if the producer has
moderate clout, if your clause is reasonably favorable, you can sometimes get
them to sign o . But a number of the major producers insist on a full rate with
no cap on the number of songs. For example, if you have a ten times cap, but
twelve songs on the album, you’ll only be paid 10⁄12 of the full rate. If the
producer insists on a 100% mechanical rate for their writing, you’ll have to eat
the di erence between that and the 10⁄12 rate you’re getting for those songs.
However you end up, even if you give the producer a full rate, be sure they
agree to be bound by the other terms of your controlled comp clause (videos,
marketing, etc.). Also, you’ll want your producer to agree they’ll go along with
all other uses of the song that you want to make (for example, lm sync licenses,
usages in your concert videos, commercials, etc.), on the same terms that you
get. In other words, they have to issue a license to a user on the same terms that
you license that user, and they of course get their share of the money. Without
this provision, they could stop you from doing a concert video with their song
in it, or block you from a use of the song that could mean a lot of money.
Answer to question on page 265:
While it was a stupid business deal, the subpublisher’s thinking was that (a) it
would gain prestige from having landed a major catalog (which prestige
immediately vanished when everyone found out what an idiotic deal they
made); (b) even though the subpublisher kept no piece, it collected the monies
and held them for a period of six months, which meant the company could earn
interest on them (this was back in the days when interest meant more than it
does now); and (c) the publisher got a bump on its share of black-box monies,
which were very meaningful in those days and not customarily shared with the
song owner.
If you nd someone ready to make a deal like this, give me a call because I
still have that land in Florida for sale.

Bonus Section!

HOW TO SET UP A PUBLISHING COMPANY
I am now about to save you an enormous amount of time and frustration in
setting up a publishing company. The tips I’m giving you here, revealed in print
for the rst time, were gained by yours truly through a series of hard knocks that
will become obvious as you see the proper way to do it.

The Absolute First Thing to Do
Before you do anything, and I mean before you do anything, you positively
must take this rst step: A liate your company with ASCAP or BMI (or if
you’re an established writer, SESAC or GMR). You have to do this rst because
the PROs won’t let you use a publishing company name that’s the same as (or
similar to) the name of an existing company. That’s for the very good reason
that they don’t want to accidentally pay the wrong party. And you don’t want
to have label copy, copyright registrations, and everything else in the name of a
company that can’t collect performance royalties.
You can a liate and secure your name by completing an application and
giving the PRO three name choices, ranked in order. That way, at least one of
the names should clear. If you’re also a songwriter and haven’t yet a liated,
you need to a liate as a writer with one of the societies at the same time (they
won’t let you a liate with more than one as a writer). You’ll have to a liate as a
publisher with the same society that you a liate with as a songwriter because
the societies insist on having a song’s publisher a liated with the same society as
the song’s writer. For the same reason, if you’re going to be a “real” publisher

(meaning you’re going to publish other people’s songs, as opposed to just your
own), you’ll need to have several companies, one for each PRO.
The publishing company a liation forms are pretty straightforward; they
ask you who owns the company, your address, and similar exciting questions.
You also need to give them information about all the songs in your catalog
(writers, publishers, foreign deals, recordings, etc.), so they can put the info into
their system and make sure you’re properly credited (read “paid”). You can get
a liation applications by contacting ASCAP, BMI, SESAC, or GMR at:
ASCAP, www.ascap.com
BMI, www.bmi.com
SESAC (only by invitation), www.sesac.com
GMR (only by invitation), www.globalmusicrights.com
If you live outside the United States, you would a liate with your local
society. Also, as we discussed brie y on page 231 some bigger writers a liate
with di erent PROs in di erent territories (e.g., BMI in the U.S. and PRS [the
UK PRO] for the rest of the world).
Here’s a tip in picking your publishing company name. The more common
the name, the less likely you’re going to get it. So steer clear of names like “Hit
Music,” “Smash Tunes,” and similar choices. Apart from those names being
obnoxiously obvious, I assure you they won’t clear. Names using just initials,
such as “J.B. Music,” also seem to have a hard time clearing (so save that concept
for your license plates). For some reason, many of my clients name publishing
companies after their streets, dogs, or children, and these seem to clear routinely
(assuming your kid’s name isn’t “Smash”).
Also, get started early—it can take about ve weeks to get an approval.
Once you’re a liated, you’ll get an IPI number. While that looks like
something written on a bathroom wall, it stands for Interested Party
Information, which probably isn’t all that helpful to you either. An IPI is a
nine- to eleven-digit number that uniquely identi es you as a writer (there’s a
separate number that identi es you as a publisher), and it’s used in 120
countries to keep track of where your songs are used. (It’s also referred to as a

CAE number, which was the old version of IPI, and stands for the French
words for “composer, author, publisher,” and for the Italian phrase “Squeeze
my lasagna.”)

Setting Up Business
If you’re doing business as a corporation, LLC, or other entity, and using the
registered entity name for your publishing company, you can skip the next step.
But if you’re an individual doing business under a publishing company name,
or if you’re an entity using a di erent name for the publishing company, then
you have to le what in California is known as a “ ctitious business-name
statement,” and it has its counterpart in most states. This is a document that’s
led with a county recorder and also published telling the world that you’re
doing business under a name that isn’t your own, and makes it legal to do so. At
least in California, you need this statement to open a bank account and, even
more important, to cash checks made out to that name. You can imagine the
screaming phone call I got as a young lawyer when I learned this lesson.

Copyright Registration
As soon as you know your songs are going to be exploited, register them with
the Copyright O ce in the name of your publishing company (see page 354). If
the songs were previously copyrighted in your name, you need to le an
assignment transferring them to the publisher’s name.
By the way, if you’re thinking of using an LLC, corporation, or other legal
entity, be sure you get tax advice rst. There are some serious tax consequences
to holding copyrights in these entities, and you should be sure it’s cool for you.

PRO Registration
To the extent you didn’t do it when you originally a liated, you need to
register all your songs with the performing rights society. That authorizes them
to license those particular songs, collect the money, and pay you. Once you

have an account set up, you can register the songs online, and it’s pretty selfexplanatory.
After that, you’re in business. You can issue licenses to record companies and
other users, make foreign subpublishing agreements, and hang an impressive
sign on your door (or at least your bedroom door). However, there’s no need to
make these deals, nor will anybody be interested, until your song has been
released and is earning some money (or has some other exploitation, like in a
lm or TV show, or is about to be released in one).

Double Bonus Section!!

HEY, KIDS, LET’S SELL A CATALOG!
Now let’s jump down the road a few years. That publishing company you set
up using the steps we just discussed is now hugely successful and worth a
gazillion dollars. Do you want to sell it?
You’ve probably read about music catalogs being sold over the last few years.
Some of the major public ones were Bob Dylan, Stevie Nicks, Bruce
Springsteen, Paul Simon, Neil Young, and a number of others, reportedly sold
for hundreds of millions of dollars. In some cases, the sales included recordings
as well as songs. So what’s this all about?
Well, it’s about a number of things. A few years ago, when streaming kicked
in, the music business had double-digit growth (meaning more than 10% per
year; “single-digit” means 9% or less because, well, it’s one digit…). And doubledigit growth in any industry is a dog whistle for Wall Street, so the nancial
hounds came running. One speci c player (Hipgnosis) started o ering prices
far beyond anything historically paid for catalogs, and they outbid everyone in
the marketplace. That drove major FOMO among the more established players,
and the price of catalogs skyrocketed.
How high did the rocket go? Historically, major publishing catalogs sold in
the range of 15 to 20 times something called the net publisher’s share, which
means the money left over after paying the writers (or any other royalty
participants). Recordings historically sold around 8 to 10 times net earnings,
after paying third parties, maybe 12 if it was a major catalog.
Enter Hipgnosis, where songs went for multiples in the mid to high 20s,
sometimes even more, and recordings sold in the range of 15 to 20, sometimes

higher. While rising interest rates have lowered these multiples a bit, the pricing
is still very high by historical standards.
With these record numbers (no pun intended), suddenly people who would
have never considered selling their songs began to re-evaluate. There’s also a
bene t (if you’re selling the copyright) that you can get capital gains tax, which
is lower than ordinary income tax by a substantial amount. So you have more
left after you pay Uncle Sam.
Thus, some very high-pro le catalogs are changing hands.
What goes into the pricing? Well, apart from the “Wow” aspect of the buyer
owning major songs, there are speci c factors that a ect the multiple. For
example, do you control the songs or recordings you’re selling (meaning you
can make administration or distribution deals), or does someone else control
them and you just get a share of income? (Control is worth more.) Do you have
approval of how the songs are used? If so, are you selling that approval right, or
keeping it? (If you keep it, you get less because you can stop income
opportunities such as commercials.) How long do you have your rights? If not
life of copyright, or if they’re really old songs and don’t have much copyright
term left, they’re worth less because the buyer has fewer years to collect income.
Are you selling an evergreen catalog (meaning a catalog that has earned about
the same for many years, and isn’t dependent on new releases)? If so, that’s
more valuable than newer catalogs riding on recent hits that decline after the
initial surge (in fact, the newer ones are often priced under 20 times earnings
for that reason). As you’ll learn in a bit, you can terminate your sale in the U.S.
after thirty- ve years, assuming the songs will still be in copyright then (see page
323), which also a ects the value.
Now for the next question: Are the people paying these high prices crazy?
Well… here’s their thinking. You be the judge.
As we discussed on page 242, the mechanical rates for streaming just went
up substantially in the U.S. Also, the streaming services are still adding
subscribers in a number of markets (meaning more revenue), and subscription
prices will go up in the future (still more revenue). Also, historically, catalogs
have been worth more over time (more about this in a minute).

So, should you sell? There’s not a one-size- ts-all answer to this, but I
generally try to talk people out of selling. There are several reasons:
1. One of the mantras in the publishing business has always been “never sell
a song.” The reason is that, historically, almost everyone who sold has
regretted it. To pick an extreme example, Michael Jackson paid $47.5
million to buy the Beatles’ songs in 1985, and those songs are now
estimated to be worth close to $1 billion. Another example (not public)
is a major artist who sold their record royalties in the 1960s, and now
each year those royalties (if they still had them) would almost equal the
purchase price. Or to look more recently, what if you sold your songs a
few years before the current surge in the market?
2. If the songs are iconic classics, then it’s a bit like selling the Mona Lisa.
Should you pass that on to your heirs?
3. Here’s a practical exercise: Take the money you get from the sale, deduct
the expense of selling, pay your taxes, and see what’s left. Can you invest
that money and make as much as the catalog was earning? And if so, do
you have the upside potential you’d get when the revenue increases
(higher mechanicals, more subscribers to the DSPs) come through? Or if
the market value of your catalog goes up?
Having said all that, there are situations where I think it does make sense to
sell. For example, if you’re an older artist, and your heirs have no interest in
running your catalog, or aren’t capable of it (either because they don’t have the
skills or would rip each other’s throats out), a sale could make sense. Also, the
value of your catalog goes into your estate when you die, which means your
heirs may owe a chunk of cash in estate tax, and you might not have that much
lying around. In that case, they’d have to do a re sale to pay the taxes, so maybe
it’s better to plan ahead and do a sale now when the market is hot.
Also, it’s not irrational to think prices are at an all-time high, and you may as
well cash out. Just know that you could be wrong (see the Beatles example
above, which was a huge price at the time). You’re betting against smart money
people who think otherwise and are therefore willing to pay you.

And nally, there’s the age-old reason for selling anything: You need the
money.
In sum, every situation is di erent so you need to assess yours with your
team. But be careful. A sale is forever.

18
Songwriter, Co-Publishing, and
Administration Deals

Okay. You now understand where publishing money comes from. Let’s look at
how you can get the most of it when you make a deal for your songs.
There are two primary deal types: a songwriter agreement (also called a copublishing agreement) and an administration (or co-administration) deal.
Let’s start with a songwriter agreement, which means a deal between you, as
a creative songwriter, and a publisher who’s going to handle your business.
What’s that look like?

SONGWRITER AGREEMENTS
The rst issue, of course, is what percentage of the earnings do you get? The
most common starting deals are 75%, but if you’ve got enough heat and
bargaining power, you can get up to 90% (rarely more, unless you’re the most
mega of stars). In addition to clout, the higher percentages also depend on
whether you want the biggest possible advance—the smaller the advance you
take, the easier it is to get a larger piece of the earnings.
Historically, a “songwriter agreement” meant a contract that gave the
publisher 100% ownership of the copyright, and in exchange the writer got 50%
of the income. This is where the terms writer’s share and publisher’s share
that we previously discussed each came to mean 50% of the income. If a writer

got more than 50%, they were (under the industry terms of those days) getting
the writer’s share plus a piece of the publisher’s share. And because they had a
share of publishing, these deals were called co-publishing agreements. In fact,
there were sometimes two contracts: one for the 50% writer’s share, and the
second for a share of the publishing income.
Nowadays, everyone just simpli es things into one contract for a larger
percentage. These deals are sometimes called songwriter agreements, but
because they include a piece of the historical “publisher’s share,” they’re also
referred to as co-publishing agreements.
Some of these deals try to charge an administration fee, also called an
admin fee, which is usually 10% of the money. The admin fee comes o the
top, before deducting expenses, and it’s really just a way of changing your split
while trying to make you feel like you’re getting more. For example, if you have
a 75% split, and they take a 10% administration fee o the top, that leaves 90%.
So your 75% of 90% only leaves you 67.5%. The major companies, who do their
own administration, don’t really do this anymore, or if they try, you can easily
get them to knock out the administration fee. But if you’re dealing with an
independent company that licenses another publisher to do their
administration, you’ll generally have to live with that third-party fee coming o
the top. In this case, nd out in advance how much the administrator charges;
you need to know, because it directly a ects what goes into your pocket (as you
just saw). Sometimes, if you have a lot of clout, you can make the independent
publisher take the administration fee out of their share and not charge you with
any of it. But this is hard to pull o .

WHAT’S IN THE POT?
Songwriter contracts de ne the pot of income that your percentage applies to.
So you want to make sure there’s as much money as possible in that pot.
Here’s what to look for:
“At Source.” You want your deal to be “at source.” As we discussed on page
268, that means your percentage applies to the earnings in each territory,

without reduction for the local subpublisher’s share. Fight hard for this.
You should almost always be able to get paid “at source” for a liated
subpublishers (meaning subpublishers who are owned or controlled by your
publisher), and when you make a deal with a major publisher, that covers the
biggest earning territories in the world. But when you’re dealing with an
independent publisher, they’re licensing their songs to third-party
subpublishers. That means you can’t get “at source” because your publisher is
being charged by someone else before the money comes back to them. If you
have a massive amount of clout, you might make your publisher eat some or all
of the the subpublisher’s fee, but this is incredibly rare.
If you can’t get paid “at source,” you should make sure that your publisher’s
deals with their subpublishers are all “at source.” That at least insures that your
publisher’s income (in which you share) is the largest possible amount because
there can’t be any deductions besides the subpublishers’ fees. And speaking of
those fees, your deal should limit what the subpublishers can charge to, say, 15%
to 20% for third-party subpublishers.
Performance Monies. As we discussed on page 230, the performing rights
societies pay songwriters directly (instead of paying the publisher, which is what
happens with every other type of income). In other words, you get 50% of the
performance money (the writer’s share) directly from your PRO, and your
publisher only collects the other 50% (the publisher’s share).
For this reason, publishers want to pay you a smaller percentage of
performance monies. For example, if you have a 75/25 deal, they’ll want to pay
you only 50% of performance monies. They make exactly the same argument
we discussed on page 266 in the subpublishing context: you get the writer’s
share directly from the PRO (which is 50% of the total income), plus 50% of the
50% publisher’s share (25% of 100% of the performance money), which gives
you a total of 75% of the income. You might want to take a quick look back at
that section and the chart, which lays it all out.
It’s always worth pushing back on this, and with substantial clout you may
do a bit better. But in the beginning, and even midlevel, stages, expect to take a
reduced piece of the publisher’s performance money.

Speaking of writer’s performance monies, historically the PROs were so
protective of a writer being paid directly by them that they wouldn’t honor an
assignment of performance royalties by the writer. This, however, has been
eroding for some time. The rst change was that the societies agreed to honor an
assignment of performance monies to a publisher who paid an advance to the
writer, and they also agreed to honor an assignment of royalties to a bank that
loaned money to the writer. But those assignments were limited to the amount
of the advance or loan. Today the PROs will generally honor an overall
assignment of monies, but they require a lot of paperwork to make sure the
writer really understands what they’re doing and that it’s really what the writer
wants. This has become an important issue in the sale of music catalogs, because
writers want to sell their performance monies, and buyers want to be paid
directly by the PROs.
“Catch-All.” Some contracts, though thankfully this seems to be
disappearing, say the songwriter gets a percentage of the publisher’s receipts
from a list of revenue, like “mechanical, performance, print, and sync” or words
to similar e ect. The problem is that the language is sometimes a limited list of
income sources, which means that the publisher could be collecting monies that
it doesn’t share with the writer. This is de nitely something to avoid (if you’re a
songwriter), and it’s easily solved by adding a “catch-all,” which is language to
the e ect of “all other income not stated herein.” Or just by de ning “gross
receipts” that go into the pot as “all income relating to exploitations of” your
songs.
Share of Advances. Most contracts also say you don’t share in advances that
the publisher gets. Most of the time, this is ne—if the publisher gets an advance
for its entire catalog of songs (of which you’re only a part), you really have no
right to share in that advance until your song has earnings that are used toward
recoupment. There’s no way to know whose songs will earn back the advance,
and so there’s no reasonable way to allocate a portion of the advance to any
particular song until royalties are earned.

What you can share, however, is an advance paid speci cally for your
composition. For example, if your song’s lyrics are licensed for a book and the
publisher gets an advance against a royalty for that use (see page 263). Since this
advance or guarantee is only for your song’s earnings (and doesn’t have to be
repaid if there are no earnings), you should get your share when the
advance/guarantee is paid to the publisher. So add language saying you do share
in advances and guarantees that are speci cally for your composition.
We discussed the concept of breakage (unrecouped advances,
nonrecoupable money, equity from investments) on page 148 in connection
with record companies. This concept also applies to publishers, so you should
ask for a share of that in your deal. Most of the companies now do it as a matter
of policy even if it’s not in your deal, but it’s cheap insurance to put in that
provision.
Print Income. As we discussed on page 271, physical printed music
consists primarily of single-song sheet music and multi-song folio books. Not
surprisingly, the physical market is shrinking as the digital tides drown them.
(We discussed digital print rights on page 273.)
All but one of the major publishers now treat print income the same as all
other income, because none of them are in the print manufacturing and
distribution business; in other words, they license print rights just like any other
rights and you get your agreed percentage of the money they make. The
holdout publisher has old contracts with major writers from its golden era that
would get an increase in royalties if they switched over to the new system, so
they hang on to the old royalty clause (which is pennies for single-song sheet
music, and royalties based on wholesale for other print uses). If you’re dealing
with them, try to get a percentage of publishing on top of those royalties to
make up the di erence.
As we discussed on page 272, publishers can get a higher royalty for use of
your name and likeness in a personality folio. If you have enough clout, you
can ask that the full royalty bump comes to you, or at least a chunk of it. The
argument is that this is for your name and likeness, and the publisher shouldn’t
share in it. Their argument is that they do have the right to your name and
likeness in connection with exploiting your music.

No Playing Footsie. If the publishing company is a liated with your record
company, you want to make sure they don’t issue “sweetheart” licenses (i.e.,
licenses at less than customary rates) to their own record company. In other
words, you don’t want them playing footsie with their sister companies at your
expense. Another example would be where their parent company also owns a
lm studio, and you don’t want them to license your songs into one of their
lms for a smaller sync fee than what’s fair in the marketplace. So add a
provision saying that licenses to their a liated companies must be on an arm’slength, customary basis.

CHARGES AGAINST ROYALTIES
Okay, so now we have this nice fat pot of money. Let’s look at what the
publisher takes out before they pay you:

“Off the Top” Charges
The publisher will take the following “o the top,” meaning these are deducted
before the publisher applies your percentage. In other words, they bear their
percentage share of these costs.
“O the top” costs are typically (1) subpublishing fees (see page 265), unless
your deal is “at source,” in which case there shouldn’t be any; (2) collection
costs, which means (a) monies deducted by collection agencies, such as Harry
Fox fees or CMRRA (see page 237) and (b) the cost of chasing deadbeats who
don’t pay; (3) costs of sample clearances (see page 262), (4) the cost of demos
(we’ll discuss them in a minute); and (5) the cost of ling copyright claims.
Most forms also include their right to deduct the cost of a lead sheet
(pronounced “leed sheet”), which means sheet music with a transcription of the
lyrics and treble clef melody notes that used to be required by the copyright
o ce. However, since the copyright o ce started taking recordings instead of
lead sheets years ago, no one’s actually created a lead sheet for decades. In other
words, they’re a piece of historical litter that still clutters up songwriter
contracts.

Under collection costs, some publishers adopted the practice of deducting an
equivalency fee or similar words. It came about like this:
As we discussed, if a publisher uses the Fox Agency to collect mechanicals
(see page 237 for what the Fox Agency is), Fox will charge 15%. The major
publishers don’t really use Fox anymore, but some try to charge an amount
equal to what Fox would have charged. In other words, they want to take 15%
o the top before splitting mechanical royalties with you, and this deduction is
called an equivalency fee because it’s “equivalent” to what Fox would have
charged. Their argument is that they’re doing Fox’s job, and since you’d have to
pay Fox, why not pay them?
When physical and download were massive, this was a big deal. Mechanicals
were a major, and often the main, source of income, plus there was a separate
license for every song and every record, so there was a lot of administration in
issuing licenses and collecting monies. Physical is now a minor issue, and the
streamers are covered by the MLC (see page 249 for who they are) for no fee. So
there shouldn’t be any equivalency fee; tell them that their overall percentage
pays for these services.
Another cost to watch is the demo cost. A demo is an informal recording
that’s made solely for the purposes of pitching a song to artists, lm companies,
etc. It’s either recorded by the songwriter (if you can sing without causing dogs
to howl) or an unknown singer, accompanied by one or two instruments
(which, since the advent of synthesizers, can sound like the London Symphony
Orchestra).
Often a publisher pays the costs to create a demo of your song, or in some
deals, they pay you $600 or so for you to make one on your own. You want to
approve the costs of any demo before they spend the money, which is an easy
“get.” Once approved, the publishers try to charge 50% to 100% of the demo
charges o the top. As your bargaining power increases, the amount they can
charge decreases to as low as zero.

Not So “Off the Top” Charges

In addition to the above, there are a number of costs that don’t come o the top.
That sounds pretty good until I tell you these charges come totally out of your
share (in other words, you eat 100% of them).
There are two major areas:
First, the publisher will recoup your advances from your share of monies.
That’s perfectly reasonable; advances are just a prepayment of your royalties.
Second, they’ll deduct all their costs regarding any infringement claims
against you. We’ll talk about infringement claims in more detail later (on page
330), but basically it means someone claims that you ripped o their copyright.
Under every contract, you’re responsible for delivering a song that doesn’t get
your publisher sued, so if they get hit, it’s on you. That means you’ll be charged
for whatever the other person wins, as well as legal fees and court costs.
In addition to these two areas, most deals have language saying the publisher
can charge you with “any other expenses” in connection with your songs, other
than the ones they listed as “o the top” (the costs we discussed in the prior
section). That’s really broad, but not so easy to change in the agreement. Try
your best to spell out what they can charge, but you’ll likely have to live with
this broad language and hope their good faith keeps them from abusing it.

COPYRIGHT OWNERSHIP
Under these deals, who owns copyrights of your song? The choices are:
1. You.
2. The publisher.
3. Both of you.
4. Neither of you (actually, I just threw that in to see if you’re paying
attention).
Historically, publishers owned 100% of the copyright, but today it’s not
unusual for the writer to own some or even all of the copyright.
For newer writers, the publisher may want to own the songs but will agree to
give them back at some point after the deal is over (as we’ll discuss later). With

even a little clout, however, you can co-own the songs 50/50, and get the rights
back at some point after the term. With still more clout (or maybe with a little
less clout, if you’re not looking for much of an advance), the writer might own
100% of the copyright and just give a publisher the right to exploit the song for a
period of time. We’ll go into the details of getting your rights back on page 307.
A deal where the publisher has no ownership is called an administration
agreement, and we’ll discuss those on page 310.

SINGLE-SONG CONTRACTS
A single-song contract is a deal for only one song. Are you impressed that I’m
willing to share this kind of industry secret with you?
The advance for a single-song agreement is usually not very signi cant. It
ranges anywhere from nothing to $250 or $500, if we’re talking about
unknown songwriters and no unusual circumstances, though the advance can
get into really big numbers if there’s something going on, like a major artist
who’s committed to record the song, or if the song is already exploding.
Major songwriters rarely sign single-song agreements other than for lms
(which are another story entirely, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 29). If they own
their own publishing, they keep the song, and if they don’t, they’re probably
under a term songwriter agreement, which by coincidence is our next topic.

TERM SONGWRITER AGREEMENTS
A term songwriter agreement is just like a record deal except that, instead of
making records, you agree to give the publisher all the songs you write during
the term. By the way, their standard language also picks up every song you’ve
written prior to the term, so be aware of this when making your deal. It’s ne if
you’re getting enough money, but you should know that’s what you’re doing.

Term

The term of songwriter agreements (the period during which you have to sign
over everything you write) was historically tied to delivery and release of songs
by a major label. In other words, your term might be the longer of one year or
until you have delivered three songs and those songs have been released. The
latter was called a minimum delivery and release requirement, abbreviated
MDRC.
But boy, have times changed.
MDRCs are virtually gone, and I for one wish them a long, permanent
voyage to hell. Although they still exist in older deals, I won’t bother you with
them. In prior editions I had this lengthy section on the intricacies of MDRCs
that I totally chucked this time, and you can thank me later.
Nowadays, most songwriting deals are for speci c periods, such as one to
three years. The publisher then gets from two to three additional options, each
for a year or maybe two. Some publishers still require you to deliver a number
of songs (though they don’t have to be released), but others have no delivery
requirement at all.
So if you don’t have to deliver any songs, does that mean you can take their
money, charter a yacht, never write another song, and say goodbye at the end of
the year term? Well, not quite…
In all these contracts, the term of your deal is extended until your advances
are recouped. That means, if the creative muse ies over your house on her way
to Uncle Morey’s, you could be stuck in the agreement like… forever.
So how do you protect yourself?
You want to add a provision that says, if your term gets extended because
you’re unrecouped, you have the right to repay the unrecouped advance at any
time during the extension, at which point the term is over. (Note this only
applies if the term has been extended; you can’t buy out during the term for the
obvious reason that you could get massively successful, pay them o , and take
your new songs elsewhere for a lot more money.)
If the publisher agrees to this, they’ll want back more than 100% of the
unrecouped advance. They commonly want 125% of the balance, meaning that
if you’re $10,000 unrecouped, you’d have to pay them $12,500. Their
reasoning is that if you’d actually earned the $10,000 to recoup, they’d have

made a pro t on top of that (remember the recoupment is only out of your
share, so they’d be getting money on top of the $10,000 if you’d earned the
royalties).
Sometimes you can get this percentage down to 110% or so. This is easier to
pull o if you have a higher percentage under the deal. For example, if you have
a 90/10 deal, you might pay back 110%, but if you have a 75/25 deal, you’ll
have to pay 125%. That sounds weird, but it’s because, if they kept the rights
under a 75/25 deal, they’d make more money than if they kept the rights under
a 90/10 deal. So they’re losing more money to let you out of a 75/25 deal early,
and therefore you have to pay more to get free.
In determining the unrecouped balance you have to pay back, you should
ask the publisher to include pipeline earnings. Pipeline monies are those
received by the publisher but not yet accounted to you. For example, suppose
you get a statement on March 31 for the period ending the prior December 31,
and it shows you are $5,000 unrecouped. If the publisher got $2,000 in
February, that money came after the close of the December 31 accounting
period and therefore isn’t due to you until after the close of the June 30
accounting period. However, the publisher has it in the bank, so it’s in the
pipeline, on its way to you. If your contract says the publisher has to count
pipeline income when they compute your payback obligation, you’d only have
to pay $3,000 (instead of $5,000) to get back the songs.
Another solution, though not all publishers will do this, is to put in a
provision that allows you to “call the option.” What this means is that you can
give the publisher a notice that says they have to either (a) exercise their option,
in which case you’re into the next period of the deal, and your unrecouped
balance is deducted from your advance for that new period, or (b) give up the
option, meaning the term continues until recoupment or repayment, but then
it’s over because they can no longer hold you beyond that term (in other words,
they lose their option).

Advances

Term songwriter agreements almost always require the publisher to pay
advances to the songwriter. Historically, publishers paid monthly advances to
“true songwriters” (meaning songwriters who don’t come with access to
someone who uses their songs). In other words, they’re not an artist who
records their own songs, a writer/producer who can get songs to the artists they
produce, or someone who writes regularly with well-known performers, etc.
It’s still possible to get this kind of deal for a true songwriter in Nashville, but
it’s not so easy in the city slicker world. If you do get such a deal, new writers
signing to a major publisher might get an advance in the range of $18,000 to
$100,000 per year, and less if you sign to a smaller publisher. The advances are
paid monthly, quarterly, or sometimes even annually at the beginning of a
contract year. (Don’t get discouraged if you’re a true songwriter—there’s
always a need for good talent. And there are true songwriters who make
multimillions writing hits for other people.)
If you’re an established true songwriter, the advances are based on a
historical analysis of your earnings—meaning they guess your future potential
based on your past—plus whatever additional gouge factor you can leverage.
Some successful writers get advances of hundreds of thousands of dollars per
year, and superstars can get into seven gures (though superstars are more likely
to make administration deals, as we’ll discuss on page 310).
The trend these days, however, is away from paying advances the way I just
outlined. More commonly, there’s an agreed total for the contract period, and
you get a percentage of that up front, and the balance over time. For example,
you might get 50% on signing and 50% a year later. Or sometimes you can get
the balance of the advance at certain income levels (for example, if you’ve
recouped 50% of your advance, you get another advance). Or if you have a
more clout, try for all (or at least the bulk of) the money on signing.
Advances for subsequent periods should increase, and the most common
practice is to use a formula (similar to the formula for record advances we
discussed on page 102).
Here’s a recent deal for an artist/writer where the advance for the second
term was two-thirds of the earnings during the rst term, less the unrecouped
balance, with a oor and ceiling:

First period
Second period
Third period

Floor
$100,000
$125,000
$150,000

Ceiling
(Not applicable)
$350,000
$450,000

Under this deal, if the writer earns $75,000 during the rst period, meaning
only $75,000 of the $100,000 is recouped (and she is thus $25,000
unrecouped), the advance for the second period would be $25,000, computed
like this: two-thirds of the $75,000 earnings ($50,000) less the unrecouped
balance ($25,000) equals $25,000. However, there’s a oor of $125,000, so she
gets a $125,000 advance (because the formula result is lower than the oor). If
the earnings are $180,000 (meaning the writer is recouped), there’s no de cit to
be deducted from the two-thirds-of-earnings formula, and she gets two-thirds of
the $180,000 earned, or $120,000, but because of the oor, it’s $125,000. If she
earns $600,000 in the year, she’d get $350,000 for the second period, because
two-thirds of $600,000 ($400,000) exceeds the maximum ($350,000).
Under some deals, the unrecouped balance is deducted from the ﬂoor. Using
the above example, suppose the writer only earns $30,000 in the rst period,
and is therefore $70,000 unrecouped. In this case, the oor would be reduced
from $100,000 to $30,000 (by deducting the $70,000 de cit from the
$100,000 oor). When you have this kind of deal, you want to ask for
something called a sub oor. That means you get a minimum number, no
matter how badly you’re unrecouped. (We discussed sub oors under record
deals, on page 102, and the concept here is exactly the same.) So, for example, if
the sub oor was $75,000, then even if the writer was $60,000 unrecouped,
instead of the advance being reduced to $30,000 as in our example above, she’d
get $75,000.
If you’re a new writer with a bidding frenzy, you can get deals that used to
be reserved for writers with a sales history. For example, you can get o ers of
$250,000 to $600,000 per contract period, and sometimes even more. With
that much heat, the deal might even be an administration deal (which we’ll
discuss on page 310).

Record Deal Tie-ins

As noted on page 120, some companies try to grab your publishing when they
sign you to a record deal. If there’s any possible way to resist this, I strongly urge
you to lash yourself to the mast and hang on. If you’re dealing with an
independent record company, many times their publishing company isn’t a real
publisher, but rather just another way to make money from you. That’s less of
an issue with the majors, because their publishing companies are rst-rate, but
it’s always better for you to be free in the marketplace. At most, maybe give
them a rst negotiation, or if you have to, a matching right. See page 104 for
what that means.

POP QUIZ
Now that you have carefully digested all of the above, here’s a pop quiz: What is
a major source of money that a publisher can’t (normally) use to recoup its
advances? (Answer on page 316.)
If you’re on the Fast Track, go to Chapter 19 on page 317. Everyone else, boogie on.

CO-WRITES (SONGS WRITTEN BY TWO OR MORE
WRITERS)
When you write a song with other people, those folks are called co-writers or
collaborators. Virtually all songs in the pop and urban space are co-written
these days.
While historically it was a problem, today most songwriter contracts only
require you to deliver a song “to the extent written” by you. However, be sure
that language is in the de nition of what you’re giving the publisher. If it
doesn’t say that, you’re promising to deliver the other writers’ shares as well,
which you obviously can’t do. This isn’t really a practical problem—the
publisher can’t expect you to give them a horse you don’t own—but make sure
your contract says this.

How Are Songs Divided?
Historically, 50% of a song went to the writer of the music, and 50% to the
lyricist. No muss, no fuss. So if one person wrote all of the melody, and one
person wrote all the lyrics, they each got 50% of the song. If two people equally
wrote the lyrics, and one person wrote the melody, then the lyricists each got
25% of the song, and the melody writer got 50%. You get the idea.
Over the past years, however, this pie has been sliced very di erently. The
reason is that rap, hip-hop, pop, EDM, and similar music are as dependent on
the track as they are on the melody and lyrics. The track is the background
rhythm and instrumentation, on which the melody and lyrics are laid (the lyrics
and melody are referred to as the topline). Also, the track itself may not come
from one place; for example, there are beat writers who only create beats that
become part of it. Or there might be a sample in the track.
Because tracks are so essential to a song, the folks creating the tracks also get
pieces of the copyright and royalties. How much? Well, there’s no hard-and-fast
rule about how much of a song goes to the track. It’s negotiated case by case,
depending on who contributed what to the song, and (frankly) the muscle of
the people involved. I’ve seen deals where the track gets one-third, with the
melody and lyrics each getting one-third, and I’ve also seen deals for important
producers where the track gets half the song. Sometimes, if the track
contribution is minimal, and the person creating it doesn’t have much
bargaining power, it gets little or nothing. For example, some beat writers sell
their beats for at fees (a few thousand dollars, or even less) and get no share of
the song.
When tracks contain samples (as we discussed on page 262, that means the
track incorporates somebody else’s material), we get an added layer of
complication. In this case, the sample owner gets a piece of the writing and
publishing, and that obviously has to come out of someone’s share. Logically,
since the person who created the track added in the sample, you’d assume that
the sample’s share of publishing should come completely from the track’s share.
However, the track owner argues that it should come out of everybody’s
earnings, on the theory that everyone bene ts from the use of the sample. (The

same issue comes up if the melody or lyric writer “borrows” from someone
else.) Results vary in direct proportion to bargaining power.
In pop music, it’s common to split songs equally among the writers,
regardless of who did what. So if there are three writers, they each get a third; if
there are four, each gets a fourth; and so on. There are of course exceptions, like
situations where a writer contributed very little (maybe just added a few words
or changed a few notes), in which case they’ll only get a small piece.
So sit down, slug it out, and have the survivor call me.

CREATIVE CONTROL
Contractual Approvals
You want as much creative control as you can get over what’s done with your
songs. Ask the publisher to give you approval of things like:
1. Make changes in the music.
The publisher will normally say that’s ne as long as they don’t have to
ask about simple changes merely to conform to the mood or style of a
particular artist.
2. Make changes in the English lyrics.
Again, this approval usually excludes minor changes for gender, mood,
or style.
3. Add foreign lyrics.
If you have enough clout, you may be able to approve translations. This
is much harder to come by, but it’s worth ghting for. Remember, it’s
also a nancial issue—translations reduce your royalties (see page 269).
4. Make changes in the title (in English).
Usually no sweat—just ask for this and you’ll get it.
5. Grant sync licenses.
If you have some bargaining power, you may be able to approve all
synchronization licenses. (These are de ned on page 152.) If you don’t
have much bargaining power, the company may resist giving you

approval of television sync licensing. That’s because publishers often
have to give a yes-or-no answer to TV studios within twenty-four hours,
and they don’t want to lose the opportunity because you’re o sipping
piña coladas on a Mexican beach. One compromise is to get approval of
television licenses with the exception of a few things that the publisher
can do without you, such as music-centric programs (like The Voice or
Dancing with the Stars), current programs like Saturday Night Live or
Entertainment Tonight, and live, on-camera performances of the song.
If you can’t get this, another compromise is to say the song can’t be
licensed for NC-17 or X-rated lms, or for a scene in a lm involving
alcohol, drugs, sex, violence, or anything else that rings your particular
chime.
6. Use the song in commercials and print ads.
At best, you should have the right to approve any usage of your song in
commercials and print ads (meaning online, newspapers, magazines,
etc.). Note: Even if you have approval of all sync licenses, you don’t
automatically have approval of commercials. The reason is that not all
commercials need a sync license. The TV and online video ads need a
sync license, but not radio commercials (because radio recordings aren’t
made under sync licenses, as we discussed on page 152; there are no
visuals to sync with), and neither does the use of your lyrics in ads. So ask
for approval of all commercials.
If you don’t have enough clout to approve all commercials, you can
compromise by requiring your consent to certain categories, such as
alcohol, tobacco, rearms, political candidates, and my personal favorite,
sexual hygiene products.
7. Licensing samples of your song (see page 262 for what sampling is).
This isn’t usually hard to get. It’s serious use of your music and involves
a creative decision of whether or not you’re comfortable with your song
being incorporated into someone else’s work (which you may think
sucks).
8. License grand rights.

Grand rights are the rights to put your song into a musical play, motion
picture, or TV show where the music is used to help tell the story. This
means stage musicals (e.g., Hamilton), ballets, operas, and the like). By
the way, the PROs (ASCAP, BMI, etc.) can only license small
performance rights, meaning concerts, radio, TV, and similar uses
outside of a dramatic context. So to get grand rights, a user has to go to
your publisher.

REVERSION OF COPYRIGHT
Smile whenever you hear the words reversion of copyright, because this will
always be good for you (unless you’re a publisher, in which case you can scowl).
This is di erent from the termination of copyright grants under the copyright
law, which we’ll discuss later, on page 348, because reversion is a contractual
provision that’s speci cally negotiated. It means the publisher must give you
back your song at some point in the future.

Conditions of Reversion
What should trigger reassignment? Ideally nothing, meaning you get back your
songs, no matter what, at some point down the line. That’s covered in our next
section. But if you can’t get an unconditional reversion, here’s some things you
should try for.
First, be sure you get back all the songs that haven’t been exploited. The test
of whether a song is exploited used to be “commercially recorded and released,”
meaning you got back all the songs that hadn’t been released. But since release
means nothing anymore, the test these days is usually based on the song having
no earnings. Better for you than “no earnings” is “minimal earnings,” say under
$2,000. In other words, if the song has earned less than $2,000, you get it back.
Be sure to require that the earnings have to happen within some time frame.
Otherwise the publisher can keep each song for the life of copyright, telling you
every week that big money is just around the corner. The usual period is two
years after the end of the deal, though it’s often extended if you’re unrecouped.

If that’s the case, be sure to get the right to buy the songs back by repaying the
unrecouped portion of the advance. Just as we discussed on page 101, in
connection with extending the term of your songwriter agreement because
you’re unrecouped, the publisher will want more than 100% of the advance.
Try to keep it down to 110% of the advance, 125% tops.
Reversion of copyright for non-exploitation is something you should always
ask for. You may not always get it, but you should always ask for it. Is it clear I
mean always? Did I say always?

Unconditional Reversion
When you move into the major leagues, or if you’re in a bidding war, you can
ask for a reassignment of all compositions, whether or not they’re exploited.
And even if you’re just getting started, you should ask for this. Owning your
songs can really be valuable—see the section on catalog sales on page 289.
How soon can you get them back? Time frames in general run from ve to
fteen years after the close of the exclusive term, with the majority in the sevento-twelve-year range. The period of time that the publisher keeps the songs after
the term is called a retention period.
This retention period is virtually always tied to recoupment—for example,
the publisher will reassign the songs to you ten years after the term, but if you’re
unrecouped, the period is extended until you recoup. Actually it’s a little longer
than recoupment; the contracts say they’ll reassign the songs at the end of an
accounting period for which you get a statement that shows you’re recouped.
As you’ll see, accounting statements come ninety days after the close of an
accoutning period (some companies send statements and pay sixty days after the
close; c’mon y’all others…), so even if you recoup a few days into a six-month
accounting period, you won’t get the songs back until sixty to ninety days after
the end of that six-month period.
If your reversion is tied to recoupment, be sure you ask for the right to repay
the unrecouped balance, in which case you get the songs back upon repayment,
rather than waiting until you actually recoup. If they give you the right to
repay, then for the reasons we’ve discussed, publishers want 110% to 125% of

the unrecouped balance. And as we covered on page 301 in connection with
the term, you should include pipeline earnings in computing how much you
have to pay them.
If you have really major clout, you can sometimes put a cap on the extension
for nonrecoupment. For example, the songs might come back seven years after
the end of the term, with the seven years being extended until recoupment or
repayment, but in any event the songs will come back after ten years, even if
you’re still unrecouped.
Note that if your term doesn’t end until recoupment, you don’t start the
clock running on the retention period until you recoup (or repay as we
discussed earlier). That means the retention period won’t be extended, because
it can’t start until you’ve recouped or repaid. But of course the start of the
retention period is delayed until your term ends.
By the way, this reversion isn’t usually “automatic.” The contracts say you
only get the rights after you give the publisher a written notice with words to
the e ect of “I want my songs back.”
When the day comes, it’s important to quickly nd a new administrator and
also let your PRO know you’re making a change. Otherwise, your money will
continue to go to the old publisher.

Collection Periods
After you get your songs back, the publisher will want to collect monies earned
while they controlled the song. In other words, if $100 was earned from
streaming during the term, but it isn’t paid to the publisher until six months
after the term, the publisher gets to collect and keep their share of that. This is
customary, but you should limit how long they can wait around for the money
to come in. The norm is for them to collect money that’s paid within one to
two years after the term, and the period during which they can collect the
money is cleverly called a collection period. Sometimes this period is longer for
international, since the monies take a while to get back to our shores. For
example, there might be a twelve-month collection period for the United States,

and an eighteen-month period for the rest of the world. Of course, you want to
keep the collection period as short as possible.

Partial Reversion
A step down from full reversion is to get a partial reversion, meaning that you
get back the administration rights to your share of the song, but the publisher
keeps the administration of their share. You may also get back copyright
ownership of your share of the song if you didn’t have any ownership during
the term. (If you had ownership during the term, for example, 50% of the
copyright, that wouldn’t change; you would just get the administration and
right to collect money on your share.)
Put another way, if you have a 75/25 deal, a partial reversion would give you
back the administration rights to your 75% share, but the publisher would keep
administration of their 25%. This is called co-administration, which we’ll
cover in more detail on page 312, but basically it means you each license your
share of the song separately to the users. It also means that anyone who wants to
use the song needs permission from both of you.

ADMINISTRATION AGREEMENTS
An administration agreement, also called an admin agreement, gives the
publisher no copyright ownership or long-term retention period, but instead
just gives them the right to administer your songs for a speci c period of time.
When the term is over, all rights come back to you, either immediately or after a
short retention period (a year or two). When they do come back, there will be a
collection period for monies earned during the term and any retention period.
(We discussed retention periods on page 308, and collection periods on page
309.)
Administration agreements are the most typical deal for established writers
who own their own publishing. These deals are less common for new to
moderate level artists, but doable if you’ve got some heat, or you don’t care
about getting much of an advance (or any).

Admin agreements are also done between major publishers and smaller
publishers that don’t have a sta . Under these deals, the major administers the
smaller publisher’s catalog in all or part of the world.
Administration agreements for less than the world are the subpublishing
agreements we discussed on page 265.
Generally these deals are for a short period of time (typically three to ve
years, usually with extensions if you’re unrecouped). And because the publisher
gets only a small piece, and only for a limited time, these deals have smaller
advances (or no advance at all). However, if you’re a superstar writer, or a small
publishing company generating steady income, you can get substantial
advances. And you can sometimes put a cap on how long the deal can be
extended if you’re unrecouped. For example, the deal might be ve years,
extended until recoupment, but in no event longer than seven years.

Administrator’s Share
Under an administration deal, the administrator takes an administration fee,
reimburses itself for any direct expenses, and pays the balance to you. If you
control the songs of other writers, the administrator customarily (but not
always) takes care of paying them. These monies are of course deducted before
paying you.
Administration fees customarily range from 10% to 25% of the gross dollars,
though superstars may be able to pay a little less. The contractual language is
actually written the opposite way, meaning that a 10% admin deal would say
that you get 90% of the monies, and it’s called a “90/10” deal.

Cover Records/Co-Writes
Similar to what we discussed in subpublishing deals (see page 265), many admin
deals give the publisher an incentive to (a) go out and get covers and (b) set up
co-writes. A cover in this context is a recording by an artist that the publisher
makes happen, such as a record or a sync license for a movie, TV show, etc. Cowrites, as you probably guessed, are songs you write with another writer. One of

the major things that creative publishers do these days is to introduce you to
other writers who will unlock the creative magic.
If the publisher delivers a cover, or sets up a co-write that generates songs,
they usually want an increased percentage of earnings from the cover or cowritten song. For example, if the administrator has a 15% administration fee, it
might increase to a 25% fee for income from cover recordings and co-written
songs set up by them. They may also want a longer period of time to administer
covers and co-writes.
You want to limit their increased percentage to covers that are actually
procured by the publisher (called a procured cover). In other words, a situation
where the publisher actively pitched the song and came home with a cover, as
opposed to some random artist calling up and asking for it. This clause isn’t as
easy to get as you think, because the publisher doesn’t want to argue about who
actually made the cover happen. They will also say that if they raise your stature
to the point that everyone wants your songs and starts hounding them, they
shouldn’t be penalized just because you’re now famous and people are calling
them. But with enough clout, you can pull o a requirement that the cover has
to be procured.
Calculating a percentage of cover income isn’t quite as simple as it looks.
That’s because, if the cover isn’t the rst recording of a work, you can’t always
tell which version of the song is generating the money. It’s easy enough for
mechanical royalties and streaming performance monies—the royalty
statements list each speci c recording, and the metadata tells you which version.
But when it comes to nondigital performances (like radio and television, which
are still big money sources), the songs are only listed by title, and there’s no way
to know which version was played on the radio (the original or the cover?).
The best solution is to give the cover record a di erent title, even if it just
means adding a parenthetical under the song title, like “stupid version.” If that
doesn’t happen, you can argue that the publisher should only get an increased
percentage on mechanicals and digital, which you can sometimes pull o . If
not, there needs to be an allocation between the cover version’s earnings and
the original’s. There’s no hard-and-fast way to do this, so (if you can get this
concept in there at all) it’s usually language saying there will be a “reasonable

allocation” between the cover version and the original in situations where they
can’t tell from the reports they get.

CO-ADMINISTRATION AGREEMENTS
In today’s world, it’s normal to have about three thousand writers for each song
(well, maybe a few less…). And it’s rare that all the writers are signed to the same
publishing company. So if a number of di erent publishers own the same song,
how does that work? What happens when several people own the same house?
The answer is what we call a co-administration agreement, which basically
says everyone takes care of their share. In other words, if I have 25% of the song
and you have 75%, and someone wants to use the song in a commercial, they
get a license from me for 25% and a license from you for 75%. It also means:
1. The user pays 25% of the money to me and 75% to you.
2. If you decide you don’t want to give a license, the deal is dead.
How could you do that to me?
Of course, I could also do it to you.
Oh, and give yourself 100 points if you realized that neither of us can stop a
compulsory license. See page 219 for what a compulsory license is.
Now I’ll let you in on an industry secret: nobody actually writes up or signs
co-admin agreements. That’s because there are so many co-written songs that
it’s just not worth the trouble. Instead, there’s usually an email exchange
agreeing on what percentage of the song the various writers and publishers
have. Then everyone relies on their rights as co-owners under the copyright law
(which we’ll discuss in the next chapter) and industry custom (which is what I
just described: all of us have to agree to issue a license, and if we do, each of us
gets paid our share directly by the user). The only sort-of exception is that coadministration rights can be covered by provisions in another agreement, such
as a producer deal where the producer is also a writer, or the agreement for a
guest artist who also co-writes.

Accountings
Publishers typically account and pay within sixty to ninety days after the close
of each semiannual calendar period (June 30 and December 31), though some
publishers pay quarterly accountings (meaning March 31, June 30,
September 30, and December 31), and superstars can sometimes get quarterly
accountings from anyone. I’m hereby o cially shaming you semiannual
publishers to go to quarterly accounting, like some of your competitors. Don’t
make me use my lawyer voice…
The other issues concerning accountings, such as the right to audit, the
period to object to a statement, etc., are the same as record deals, which we
discussed on page 173.

Writing Teams
If you’re in a band that writes together, or if you write with a partner on a
continual basis, and a publisher is signing all of you, there are some special
points you need to cover in your deal.
If you don’t regularly write with the same people, or if you do but (a) you
and the other people are signing to di erent publishers, or (b) you’re each
signing a separate deal with the same publisher, you can skip to the quiz on page
315.
For those of you still here… Hi.
Just to make the discussion simpler, I’m only going to talk about a writing
team of two people. But the same principles apply to bands or other clusters of
souls who regularly write together.
The writing team issues are:
Advances. Sorry to report, but the advances don’t double for a writing team.
The reason is pretty simple—even though there are two of you, you’re each
only writing one-half of a song, and so the total output is the same as the
publisher would get from one person writing 100% of the song.

Cross-Collateralization. If the publisher hands the two of you one contract
for you both to sign, listen up. You should each try to have a separate account
for your earnings and advances, and ask that your two accounts are not crosscollateralized (see page 89 for a discussion of cross-collateralization). This isn’t
necessary if you always split the songs 50/50 and get equal advances—your
earnings are going to be identical, as are your advances. And it’s not necessary if
you’re sure this will be true for the life of the deal (even after that night when
your partner drives her Toyota over your prize azaleas). If you’re not 100%
positive, ask for separate, non-collateralized accounts, and read on.
The downside of separating your accounts is that it may reduce the total
advance. That’s because the publisher might not be able to get the advance back
from the total earnings. Observe:
1. One or both of you may occasionally write songs by yourself, which
means one of you could earn more than the other. For example, if you
write a smash on your own, you would recoup your advances, while
your partner’s account is still unrecouped. This is good from your point
of view, but the publisher is giving up the chance to get back the total
advance, and therefore will be less willing to take a risk.
2. You might stop writing in the same ratio that you get advances (e.g., you
may take the advances 50/50, but on some songs you split the earnings
60/40 or 75/25). This means the advances are recouped unevenly (see
the example below).
3. You may break up as a team completely, and each start writing on your
own. In that case, you absolutely don’t want the other person’s advances
charged to your account. And you don’t want your earnings used to
recoup the other writer’s advances.
Let’s look at an example. Suppose you and your co-writer, Louise, are each
getting $10,000 a year under a songwriting agreement. At the end of year one,
you’ve written a number of songs on a 50/50 basis that earned a total of $5,000.
So each of you was credited with $2,500 in royalties. This means you’re each
$7,500 unrecouped.

Now you write a song by yourself, which earns $20,000 in royalties. If your
accounts are not cross-collateralized, the $20,000 earnings will recoup your
$7,500 de cit, and the publisher pays you $12,500. If your accounts are crosscollateralized, the publisher will deduct not only your $7,500 deﬁcit but also
Louise’s $7,500 deﬁcit. Thus, out of the $20,000 your song earned, you’d only
get $5,000 ($20,000 less your $7,500 de cit and less your partner’s $7,500
de cit). Since you didn’t get the other $7,500 advance (your co-writer did), you
will not be a happy camper. So separate your accounts. I’d hate to read about
Louise oating up in the East River.
On the other hand, if you really need the extra advance that comes from
combining your accounts, you may decide to let the publisher crosscollateralize your and Louise’s earnings and advances. If you do, and if one of
you earns more than the percentage of the advance you received, you and your
partner will have to work it out between yourselves. For example, using the
numbers in the prior paragraph, you should have been paid $12,500, but you
only got $5,000 because the other $7,500 was used to recoup Louise’s advance.
Also, Louise is now recouped, so she’ll get paid future monies that she
shouldn’t have received because she would have still been unrecouped if it
weren’t for your song. So the bottom line is that, to make things right, Louise
has to pay you $7,500.
This adjustment can be done by Louise writing you a check, but more
commonly it’s done by adjusting income from other places, like future earnings
from other songs, or even records, merch, touring, etc. Your business manager
can do the math for you.
Separate Obligations. Another problem with signing one agreement is that
you have to be sure your obligations are separate. Otherwise you’ll be
responsible for a breach of contract by the other writer. For example, if Louise
wrongfully terminates her agreement and walks out on the publisher, and the
publisher sues her, you don’t want them to seize your royalties as a way to pay
for their damages and/or legal fees.

NOW LOOK WHERE YOU ARE!

Here you are, only partway through the book and you already know enough to
answer the nal homework assignment I gave after my nine-week music
business class at USC Law School. Very impressive!
Try your hand at this (I updated the questions but kept the principles; hope
you can tell I updated it…).
You’re a rapper who’s signed to Universal Publishing as a songwriter. You’re
the featured artist on a recording with JJ, a producer. JJ used a track created by
Bull, who’s signed to Warner Music as a songwriter. Bull’s track had two
recording samples he borrowed from James Brown.
The Squirrel Brothers, who are writers signed to Kobalt Publishing, wrote
the lyrics. You and your producer JJ wrote the topline melody.
At the last minute, Drake came in to write and perform a guest rap.
You give your record to Columbia Records, and it’s blowing up.
Each time the track is streamed, downloaded, or sold, who gets paid? (Ignore
any recoupment.)
Clue: There are twelve, possibly thirteen, parties, but you won’t know one
of them if you’re not on the Expert Track.
Answers:
Here’s who gets paid for the recording:
1. You.
2. Drake (and/or his label)
3. JJ, the producer.
4. Possibly Bull, if he didn’t sell his track outright.
5. The label that owns James Brown’s recordings (for the sample).
6. Union funds for AFM and SAG-AFTRA (you wouldn’t know this if
you weren’t on the Expert Track; see page 194 if you’re curious).
The folks paid for the song are:
1. Your publisher (Universal).
2. JJ’s publisher (Sony Music Publishing).

3. Bull’s publisher (Warner Music).
4. The Squirrel Brothers’ publishers (Kobalt).
5. Drake’s publisher.
6. James Brown’s publisher (for the sample).
7. The performing rights societies.
Answer to quiz on page 303:
The writer’s share of performance monies (see page 294 for why).
If you’re on the Fast Track, and if you’re in a group, go to Part IV (Chapter 21) on
page 361.
If you’re on the Fast Track, and you’re not in a group, go to Chapter 23 on page
389.
Everyone else, read on…

19
Advanced Copyright Concepts

WHO OWNS THE COPYRIGHT?
Copyright ownership is pretty easy to gure out if you sit down with your
zither and knock out a smash by yourself. You, of course, are the owner, since
you created it. But we lawyers wouldn’t have much fun if it were all that
simple, so let me show you how we’ve managed to fuzz it up over the years.

How About Two People Writing a Song Together?
Suppose you and your cousin Otto write a brilliant work together. Who owns
it?
As you probably guessed, the two of you do. But…
Who Controls the Song? Suppose you want to put the song on your next
album, and Otto wants to save it until he gets a record deal. Can he stop you?
The ever-scintillating Section 201(a) of the Copyright Act spells this out
pretty clearly. It says that you and Otto have created a joint work. (Yes, I know
what that sounds like.) When you have a joint work, either of the
authors/owners can deal non-exclusively with the entire composition, subject to
the obligation to pay the other person his or her share of the proceeds. That
means you can give all the non-exclusive licenses you want to record
companies, lm companies, etc., subject to paying Otto for his share of the
song. And Otto can do the same. (This is only true in the United States, by the

way; not in other countries. Over there a user needs a license from both owners
to use the song.)
What Exactly Do You Own? How about this one: You and Otto sit down to
write a song. You write only the music, and Otto writes only the lyrics. Suppose
you don’t like Otto’s lyrics, so you take back your music and ask somebody else
to write new lyrics. Can you do that and cut out Otto?
My mentor Payson Wol once told me that creating a joint work is like
adding water to a ball of clay and squishing it. My partner Bruce Ramer uses the
analogy of scrambling the white and the yolk of the egg. So, as you may be
starting to guess, the law isn’t what you’d intuitively think. It says that even if
two people create separate, distinct parts of a work, they each own an interest in
the whole copyright, not just their own contribution. That means Otto owns
half the music and half the lyrics, and so do you. So you can’t just pick up and
leave each other. Even if you add new lyrics, Otto still has a percentage of the
song.
Does this sound like an absurd result? To some extent, yes; but if you get
into dividing up works where the contributions aren’t so easily de ned as music
and lyrics (which is most of the time), the alternative is even more impossible.
Think, for example, about all the elements that go into making a lm. What
part is the screenwriter’s? The director’s? The producer’s? The wardrobe
designer’s? Or what about a song where three people work on the lyrics, while
two work on both music and lyrics?
What Makes a Joint Work “Joint”? By now you’re beginning to see that
this is more complicated than it rst appears. But we’re just getting warmed up.
Try this one:
A songwriting team consists of one person who lives in California, and
another who lives in New York. The California writer, totally on her own,
writes a piece of music and emails it to her friend in New York. A few days later,
the guy in New York sits down and writes the lyrics. Is this a joint work? When
they work totally separately, did these two people create the song together?

The law says, to have a joint work, you only need an author who intends, at
the time of creation, to merge his or her work with someone else’s. In other
words, when the musician wrote the music in California, did she intend to have
lyrics written for it? That’s certainly the case in our example, even though the
lyricist and melody writer never physically got together. (It’s almost always true
that a lyricist intends to merge the words with music, since he or she probably
has little call for poetry readings.) So, to have a joint work, you don’t need to be
in the same room (or on the same planet), and you don’t even have to know
each other. As long as there’s an intent to merge the work at the time of
creation, it’s a joint work whenever the rest of it comes together.
If you wanna see this principle carried to extremes, get a load of this: In the
1940s, a guy named Ernie Barnett wrote the melody of a song, and his wife,
Maybelle, wrote the lyrics. They sold it to a publisher who thought Maybelle’s
lyrics were pretty awful (a lot of “moon” and “June,” I’ll bet). So the publisher
tossed out Maybelle’s words and had a new set of lyrics written by a total
stranger, George Norton. The result was a song called “Melancholy Baby.”
Based on these facts, a court held that “Melancholy Baby” was a “joint
work,” and that George was one of the joint creators. Even though Ol’ George
came along after the song was supposedly nished, he was still a joint author
because when Ernie wrote the melody, he intended to merge lyrics with it. The
fact that the lyrics were ultimately written by someone Ernie never met was
irrelevant. Moreover, the new lyricist had an interest in the music (although the
case didn’t deal with that issue). Nice coconuts, eh?
For the legal freaks, the case is Shapiro Bernstein v. Vogel, 161 F.2nd 406
(1947).

WORKS FOR HIRE
When Teddy Kennedy was at Harvard, he hired someone to take an exam for
him. As you can imagine, it caused a pretty big stink. But guess what… The
copyright law is one place where this is perfectly legal.
It’s done with a work for hire (technically, in the copyright law, it’s called a
work made for hire, but the industry shorthand is work for hire). A work for

hire happens when you hire someone to create copyrightable material for you.
If you follow the technical formalities, the employer actually becomes the
author of the work insofar as the copyright law is concerned. And when I say
“the author,” I really mean THE author. It’s as if the person you hired doesn’t
even exist (in the eyes of the copyright law), and indeed their name doesn’t even
have to be on the copyright registration form.
I suspect (but I really don’t know and would hate to disillusion myself by
researching it) that the “work for hire” concept was developed to cover such
things as fabric companies that print copyrighted designs on their cloth. They
wanted to be sure that the company (not the backroom dork who actually
designed the pattern) was the owner of the copyright. Seems reasonable enough.
But for showbiz…

Works for Hire in the Entertainment Industry
Here’s an example of works for hire in the entertainment world. Suppose you
are Walt Disney Pictures and you hire someone to write the theme for Snow
White. (I picked the example of a motion picture for a particular reason, as
you’ll see on page 321.) In this situation, Walt Disney Pictures (the corporation)
becomes the author of the work, and the person hired to write it disappears.
Does this mean the writer won’t get his or her name listed as the writer of the
song (in the lm, on the charts, etc.)? Usually not; the real creator customarily
gets credit. (But sometimes, for example with jingles written for radio or
television commercials, a creator doesn’t.) Also, the amount of money that the
real creator gets isn’t usually a ected by this type of arrangement—most of the
time they’re paid exactly the same money, whether or not the work is “for hire.”
However, a number of important rights are drastically di erent in works for
hire (as you’ll see later, on page 324). So whenever you’re creating a work for
hire, be alert to the consequences. Spoiler Alert: they’re not good for you.

Technical Deﬁnition

Under the copyright law, a work for hire can be created in only one of two
ways. They’re set out in Section 101 of the Copyright Act and are a bit
technical. (You can skip to the “Duration of Copyright” section on page 322 if
technical things make you squirmy. But try it rst.)
The two ways to get a work for hire are:
1. The work is made by an employee within the scope of employment.
An example of this is the fabric designer I mentioned before.
The test of whether there is “employment” is not the one used for the
income tax laws, or in fact for any other type of laws. The law says that
the employer must actually be “directing, or supervising the creation of
the work, in a very speci c way.” (The major case in this area is
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S. 730 [1989], in
which the Supreme Court held that a Vietnam memorial sculpture was
not a “work for hire” because the people who paid to have it created
didn’t exercise control over the details of the work, didn’t supply the
tools, had no ongoing employment relationship, etc.)
Normally (although not always) a songwriter is given a lot of latitude
in his or her creation, so it would likely fail the employment test. I
suppose, if a songwriter is given very speci c instructions, and is
supervised during the process, he or she might be considered an
employee under the copyright laws. But that’s very rare. The most
common works for hire in the music area are those that fall under this
next section.
2. If a copyright is not created by an employee within the scope of
employment, it can only be a work for hire if it meets all of the
following criteria:
The work must be (1) commissioned (meaning created at the request
of someone, not a previously created work); (2) created under a written
agreement that speci es it’s a work for hire; and (3) created for use in one
of the following:
(a) A motion picture or other audiovisual work. This is the most
common area where songs are treated as works for hire. It includes

musical scores, a song written for a lm, etc. Remember, these songs
do not have to be written by employees. They just need to be under
a written agreement that says (1) they’re works for hire, and (2)
they’re commissioned for use in an audiovisual work (meaning
created for that work; not a pre-existing song that’s added to the
work).
(b) A collective work. A collective work is a collection of individual
works, each of which is independently capable of copyright. Examples
are an anthology of short stories; a magazine with a number of
copyrightable articles; an encyclopedia; etc.
(c) A compilation. A compilation is a work made by compiling a
bunch of things, and thus it includes collective works (where the
parts are separately copyrightable). However, it also includes works
where the compiled materials are not separately copyrightable, such
as a reference index to the Bible.
(d) A translation of a foreign work. ¿Qué pasa?
(e) A supplementary work, which is a work supplementing another
work (clever de nitions, these copyright guys, eh?). These are things
like the introduction to a book.
For a brief period in 1999, audio recordings were added to the categories
listed above (in other words, the Copyright Act said they could be works for
hire). However, the artist community went ballistic, and after a battle royale,
Congress reversed itself and took recordings out. Nonetheless, record
companies take the position that an album is a “collective work” and therefore
think they have the right to treat recordings as works for hire anyway. We’ll talk
about this in more detail on page 353.
Before we can discuss the consequences of something being a work for hire,
you need a few more concepts. So plug it into your memory bank (or put a
Post-it or electronic bookmark on this page if your memory is like mine), and
we’ll come back to it.

DURATION OF COPYRIGHT

Remember that a copyright is a limited duration monopoly? So a logical
question is, “How long does that copyright last?”

History
Prior to 1978, the United States had this bizarre copyright concept that was
adopted in 1909 and not changed for almost seventy years. I tell you about it
because (1) it’s still relevant for older copyrights, and (2) I had to learn it, so why
shouldn’t you listen to it?
The main thing to know about these old copyrights is that they used to last
for a period of twenty-eight years from publication of the work. (I could spend
an entire chapter on what publication means, but I’d like you to nish my book
awake, so I’ll skip it. Basically, it means “distributed to the public.”) These
copyrights were then renewable for an additional twenty-eight years, so the
maximum copyright protection was fty-six years.
In 1976, Congress did a major, seventy-thousand-mile overhaul of the
copyright laws. It was so extensive that the 1976 Copyright Act wasn’t e ective
until January 1, 1978, because Congress wanted to give everyone a year to
study it.
This new law dumped the twenty-eight plus twenty-eight nonsense. Instead,
it said that the duration of copyright for works created after January 1, 1978,
was the life of the author plus fty years (which was already how the term of
copyright was measured in a lot of other countries). Congress also extended the
old fty-six-year terms (for works created before January 1, 1978) by nineteen
years, for a total of seventy- ve years.
In 1998, the congressional folk got together again to talk about copyright. In
memory of congressman and croonster Sonny Bono, they slapped on another
twenty years (known as the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, or as I
like to think of it, “I Got You Twenty, Babe”). This act extended the copyright
term for pre-1978 songs (if they were still under copyright) to a total of ninetyve years, and gave the 1978 and later copyrights a term equal to the life of the
author plus seventy years.

When a copyright expires, the work goes into the public domain (also called
p.d.), which means anyone can use it for free.
So copyrights created in 1978 or after now last for life of the author plus
seventy years. Simple, right? Well, how about:
1. A work written by two people. Whose life do you use to measure the
copyright duration?
2. A work written under a phony name (called a pseudonymous work)?
Or something created anonymously? How do you know whose life to
check on?
3. Works for hire. Remember, the author is the employer, who could be a
corporation. And some of those suckers live forever.
Well, rest comfortably, because all of these have been handled. They work
like this:
1. In the case of a joint work, the copyright lasts until seventy years after the
death of the last survivor. So write all your songs with your ve-year-old
daughter.
2. Anonymous (no name) or pseudonymous (phony name) works last the
sooner of ninety- ve years from publication, or one hundred twenty
years from creation. Creation means the rst time it’s xed in tangible
form (written down or recorded). Publication, as I said, is a tricky little
devil, but for our purposes just assume it means distribution to the
public.
3. Works for hire are the same as anonymous.

RIGHT OF TERMINATION
One of the best goodies that creators got in the 1976 Copyright Law is the right
of termination.
The termination provisions say that even if you make a bonehead deal, the
copyright law will give you a second shot—thirty- ve years later. In other

words, thirty- ve years after a transfer, you can get your copyright back.
By the way, this termination is only for the U.S. copyright. You’re stuck with
whatever deal you made for the rest of the world. As it happens, the United
States is the only country where you get a do-over.
The exact mechanics get a bit technical, so I’ve stuck them back on page 348,
in a section for the die-hards.

Termination of Works for Hire—Not So Fast,
Charlie…
Now you know enough to understand the consequences of something being a
work for hire (see page 319 for what that is). With works for hire, there are no
termination rights, because there was no transfer in the rst place, and therefore
no transfer to terminate. Remember, the creator never existed in the eyes of the
copyright law—the person or company commissioning the work owns it as if
they had created it themselves. So with works for hire, there’s no copyright
coming back to you and your kiddies. Bummer.
Be very aware of this consequence when you create a work for hire.

PUBLIC PERFORMANCE OF RECORDINGS
In most developed countries outside the United States, the artist and record
company are paid a royalty every time a recording is played on the radio. (Note,
we’re talking here about record company and artist payments from the public
performance of recordings, which is very di erent from royalties that are paid to
a songwriter and publisher for the public performance of musical compositions,
which was always done in the United States.) These are known as Neighboring
Rights, I suppose because they live next door to the mainstream sources of
income, and the Brits like to spell it “Neighbouring” Rights so they can have
one more useless letter than we do.
Even though artists and record companies have been paid for the
performance of recordings in other territories from the beginning, the United
States didn’t recognize this right until 1995. In fact, as we’ll discuss later, when

Congress created a sound recording copyright in 1972 to stop piracy, it went
out of its way to say there was no public performance royalty. And when they
nally did get around to a performance royalty in 1995, Congress limited it to
digital performance of the recordings. So unlike other countries, there’s no
performance money for use of the recordings in over-the-air radio broadcasting
(also called terrestrial radio). We’ll discuss this in more detail on page 327.
In foreign territories, neighboring rights monies can be really signi cant.
That sounds like good news, except that U.S. artists aren’t usually entitled to
collect them. The reason is pretty simple: Since the United States doesn’t pay
foreign artists when their recordings are performed in the U.S., foreign
countries don’t pay U.S. artists when their recordings are performed over there.
In part, this comes from a sense of fairness, and to keep a balance of monies
going in and out of the territory. But it’s also a way to make more money
available to the local artists. (If U.S. artists aren’t taking money for the
performance of recordings, there’s more left over for the locals. However, in
some territories the record companies collect these monies if the artist aren’t
eligible.)
In recent years, it’s been possible for Americans to get paid for some
countries, but only if you jump through the proper hoops. Those hoops vary
from place to place, and a key player in this obstacle course is something called
the Rome Convention (an international treaty dealing with intellectual
property). If the country where you live signed the Rome Convention, you get
performance monies from all the other countries that signed it. Most of the
countries that signed it are in Europe and Scandinavia, though Japan and
Australia also came to the party. Guess which country didn’t sign it? Right… the
U.S. of A.
Still, you can get some foreign monies. Portugal, Romania, Hungary,
Russia, and Spain, and some hot spots like Croatia, Latvia, Bulgaria, and
Slovenia, pay everybody. Germany, Italy, and Brazil pay if the record is released
in a Rome Convention country within thirty days of its initial release in a non–
Rome Convention territory. Because of streaming, that means almost every
record quali es these days.

Starting in 2020, Americans became eligible in Canada, The Netherlands,
and Ireland, though some members of the EU are objecting to this. And due to
a decision by the EU Court of Justice, there’s potential to expand to the rest of
the EU as well. But that’s still a ways down the road.
Even if you don’t otherwise qualify, there are two possible ways to get these
monies today:
1. If you’re signed to a label based in a Rome Convention country, you are
eligible.
2. If you’re not signed to a label based in one of those territories, you can
still get paid if you record (or partially record) your recordings in a
Rome Convention country. (Hot tip: Canada is a party to the Rome
Convention and they have great recording studios…) The place where
you render your services is the key to whether you’re entitled to foreign
performance money. For example, if you record your vocals in Canada,
you’re golden. If all the musicians record in Canada, but you sing in
Wyoming, you’re toast (though Wyoming is lovely this time of year).
3. SoundExchange, who we’ll discuss in the next section, will collect your
foreign neighboring rights for a fee generally in the range of 7%, but if
you’ve got signi cant monies, a number of artists use SoundExchange
for the U.S. and hire a neighboring rights agency to collect for the rest of
the world. Examples of these agencies are Kollective Neighboring Rights
(formerly Kobalt), PPL in the United Kingdom, and Downtown
Neighboring Rights. Their fees are about the same as SoundExchange,
but they have local o ces, relationships with the collection societies in
other territories, understand the rules that maximize Americans getting
paid, and make sure you’re properly registered everywhere. Also, these
folks sometimes pay advances.
Meanwhile, back in the U.S.A…

U.S. Digital Performances of Recordings

In 1995, Congress amended Section 106 of the Copyright Act with something
called the Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995.
Those folks in Washington sure know how to put a sexy title on something,
huh?
Section 106 says you get paid for performances of your recording if all of the
following apply:
1. It must be a digital public performance, meaning a digital transmission
rather than over-the-air AM and FM radio.
In the last few years, many radio stations have converted their overthe-air signals to digital (HD radio), which is a digital signal. So it sounds
like you’ll get performance monies when they play your recordings over
the air, right? Well…
Turns out the broadcasters have a lot of friends in Congress. In a nice
little lobbying move, they managed to exclude digital over-the-air
broadcasts from the de nition of digital performances.
The only exception is when a radio station simulcasts its signal over
the Internet (meaning it streams the signal at the same time that it
broadcasts over the air). In that case, you get paid for the streaming
portion (but not the over-the-air part).
2. You only get paid for the digital performance of audio-only sound
recordings (meaning the artist doesn’t get paid for performances of a
recording in lms, TV shows, or commercials).
So, to break it down, the only digital performances that fall under Section
106 are audio-only digital transmissions that don’t go over the air. This includes
all the music streaming services, satellite radio services (like Sirius XM), digital
cable and satellite television audio music channels (e.g., Music Choice), noninteractive webcasters (both retransmissions of FCC-licensed radio stations on
the Internet and originally programmed “Internet-only” services), services that
stream to commercial businesses (grocery store music), streaming to mobile
devices, and other assorted digital weirdos.

If a broadcast quali es for a performance royalty under this criteria, you get
paid one of two ways:
1. In 1998, Congress followed up their 1995 extravaganza with the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (also known as the DMCA). This
baby set up a compulsory license for non-interactive streaming of
recordings. That means, under certain conditions (which we’ll discuss in
a second), the owner of a sound recording must allow a user to transmit
it. If the broadcast quali es for the compulsory license, you get the fees
laid out by the Copyright Royalty Board (which I’ll give you in a
second).
If the use doesn’t qualify for the compulsory license…
2. Remember, as we discussed on page 218, that a copyright owner can
stop someone from using their work without permission unless the user
can get a compulsory license. Because the DMCA compulsory license
we just discussed is limited to non-interactive uses, an interactive digital
service provider (DSP) such as Spotify, Apple Music, and Amazon has to
get a voluntary license from the owner of the sound recording.
Otherwise they’re out of business.
That’s the big picture. Now let’s take a look at the compulsory and voluntary
licenses in more depth.
Non-Interactive Compulsory Licenses. How does a broadcaster qualify for
a compulsory license? The rules are found in the riveting Section 114 of the
Copyright Act, where there’s a whole slug of requirements that boil down to
making the broadcaster act like a non-interactive over-the-air radio station with
even more restrictions. For example, they can’t announce their playlist in
advance, there are limits on how many songs of a particular artist they can play
in any three-hour period, there is a limit on the number of songs from a
particular album in a three-hour period, and stu like that.

If a broadcaster quali es for a compulsory license, they pay statutory license
fees (meaning rates set by the statute) to an out t called SoundExchange.
SoundExchange is a nonpro t organization whose board is made up of record
company people, artists, and artist representatives. Essentially, it acts like
ASCAP and BMI, meaning it collects fees from all the users, deducts its costs,
and pays the balance to its members. Except, of course, that it’s dealing with the
performances of recordings instead of songs.
SoundExchange collects substantial monies; in 2022, it collected roughly
$1.1 billion.
After deducting its costs, SoundExchange divvies up the dough as follows:
50% to the record companies, 45% to the featured artists, and 5% to a fund
controlled by the American Federation of Musicians (for non-featured
musicians) and AFTRA (for nonfeatured vocalists) (see page 193 for who AFM
and AFTRA are). The artist monies come to you directly from
SoundExchange, not through your label, so they can’t be used to recoup any
advances or costs. Thank your representatives in Congress.
The rates are incredibly complex. They vary with whether the broadcaster is
a commercial webcaster (an FCC-licensed station or other webcaster that puts
its signal on the Net), an educational webcaster (like a college radio station),
or a non-commercial webcaster (NPR, a charity, and the like). Also, within
the commercial category, there’s a distinction between subscription-based
webcasters and ad-supported (free to the user) webcasters.
Got all that? Good, because there’s more.
At the higher end, there are SDARS, which sounds like a lung disease
epidemic but in fact means satellite digital audio radio services (the only
one is Sirius XM); BES, meaning business establishment services, who pump
music into restaurants, hotels, and tropical sh stores; CABSAT, standing for
cable/satellite services, who deliver music over cable or satellite to your TV or
set-top box; and PES, which means pre-existing subscription services that
were in existence prior to July 31, 1998, like Sirius XM and Music Choice.
The PES folks were in business when Congress changed the law in 1998, and
they had already set up their business models around the old set of rules.
Because of this (and because they have strong lobbyists and lawyers), they got a

senior citizen discount and have been allowed to continue paying a lower rate.
Which in some cases is seriously less than newer competitors who provide the
same service.
This lower-rate group includes the massive Sirius XM, so the record
companies aren’t exactly thrilled. But this is about to change. As we discussed
on page 248, under the Music Modernization Act, the new standard for all
Section 114 licenses (which includes PES) is what would be paid by a “willing
buyer–willing seller.” Accordingly, as new rate hearings come along, the old
guys will eventually pay market rates. But this will take several years to work its
way through the system.
The rates are fractions of pennies for each performance, and if you really
want to know the details (though I can’t imagine why), head over to
SoundExchange’s website (www.soundexchange.com). By the way, I just gave
that a whirl and couldn’t easily nd the rates, so I did a search for “Sound
Exchange” + “rates” which brought it up.
Other than National Public Radio, there’s a minimum per year for each
service of $1,000 per channel or station, with a cap of $100,000. These
minimums are advances against the per-performance fees.
Voluntary Licenses. If a performance doesn’t fall within the statutory license
(primarily this means performances on interactive services and video services),
then as we noted, the record company charges whatever the tra c will bear. In
other words, this is a voluntary license between the record company (the owner
of the recording) and the DSPs.
Under these voluntary license deals, the DSPs pay the record companies a
percentage of their revenue, as we discussed on page 144. But unlike the
compulsory license, where the record company and artist are paid separately by
SoundExchange, all the money under voluntary licenses goes to the record
company, and the artists get their royalties based on it. So not only is the artist’s
cut usually lower than the 45% under SoundExchange (50% minus the union
5%), the money is available for recoupment of advances and costs under the
record deal.

To Interact or Not to Interact?
There are some legally interesting in-between types of services that are arguably
interactive and arguably non-interactive. For example, Pandora lets you tell
them what kind of music you like, then they customize a stream for you. You
can also tell them whether or not you like each song, and the more feedback you
give them, the better they get at pleasing you with their choices (at least in
theory). So you sort of control the content, but not exactly—you can’t tell
them to play a speci c song at a speci c time. But you can shape what’s coming
at you.
The record companies argued that this made these services interactive, and
therefore they had to get a voluntary license (which is much more expensive
than a non-interactive compulsory license). The services had a very di erent
opinion, saying they were non-interactive and therefore entitled to a
compulsory license. This led the major record companies to sue a company
called Launchcast (which had a service similar to Pandora’s) for copyright
infringement.
All the record companies settled this case except Sony, who took it to trial in
New York. The trial court ruled in favor of Launchcast, saying their service
wasn’t interactive, and Launchcast won the appeal as well. So for now, these
services are non-interactive.
However, some of the DSPs o er a mid-tier service (priced in between noninteractive and interactive), which has more interactivity, such as the ability to
repeat songs, hear some material o ine, maybe see the songs coming up in
advance, etc.). They can’t get a compulsory license when they o er these
features, so they had to go to the record labels and get a voluntary license. These
deals look just like the interactive services deals; meaning they pay the labels a
percentage of their revenue in the mid 50% range. This percentage, however, is
applied to the lower fee charged for the mid-tier services (as opposed to the full
interactive subscription fee for customers that get the fully interactive service).

WHAT HAPPENS WHEN SOMEONE RIPS OFF
YOUR COPYRIGHT?

When someone uses a part of your song without permission, they infringe
your copyright. And there have been a lot of high-pro le copyright
infringement cases in the music area over the last few years, some of the most
notable being the “Blurred Lines” decision, followed by the “Stairway to
Heaven” case, and then the “Dark Horse” case. (For the legal freaks, the cases are
Williams v. Gaye, 895 F.3d 1106 (9th Cir. 2018) [“Blurred Lines”], Skidmore
v. Led Zeppelin, 952 F.3d 1051 (9th Cir. 2020) [“Stairway to Heaven”], and
Gray v. Hudson, 28 F.4th 87 (9th Cir. 2022 [“Dark Horse”].) Basically, as with
every other copyright infringement lawsuit throughout history, they turned on
the same question: Did you steal my song?
If you think someone ripped o your song, you can sue them for it. But
there are quite a few hurdles you have to jump over before you can back a truck
up to their house and ll it with money, lamps, and rugs.
Here’s the story:
1. First, before you can le suit, you have to either:
a. Be the copyright owner, or
b. Have an exclusive license of the rights that are being infringed, or
c. Be what’s called a bene cial owner, which means you sold
someone your copyright in exchange for royalties, or
d. Be a nutcase, but have $400 and know where to nd the
courthouse. (Unfortunately, my clients have seen a number of
these.)
2. Assuming you’re one of those, you then have to register your copyright
with the Copyright O ce (more about that on page 354) before you can
le a lawsuit for infringement of a U.S. work. (Foreign works get a pass,
since there’s no registration in other countries. It’s a uniquely ’merican
idea.)
You can only le suit for copyright damages within three years after
the infringement. So if they stopped using the infringing materials more
than three years ago, you can’t sue them. If the infringement is
continuing (for example, they’re still streaming records with your song),
you can le suit more than three years after the rst infringement, but

you only can recover damages based on monies earned during the three
years before ling. In other words, if you don’t register your copyright
and sue within three years from the rst infringement, you can’t go all
the way back to get money out of the thief.
Some courts have held that the three years don’t start until you either
knew or should have known about the infringement (a concept called
delayed discovery). In other words, if you never knew about the
infringement, or couldn’t reasonably have known about it, you can get
damages all the way back to the rst infringement, even if it was twenty
years earlier. However, there’s a cloud over this sunshine. The Supreme
Court seemed to say (but not 100% clearly) that the three years starts
from the date of rst infringement even if you didn’t and couldn’t have
known about it. (The case is Petrella vs. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc.,
134 S.Ct. 1962 (2014).) Because this opinion wasn’t 100% clear,
however, some lower courts still use the delayed discovery rule. To date
it hasn’t been decided by an appellate court, so feel free to give it a whirl.
There is also a recent case concerning registration that a ects all this,
but I’ve stuck it back on page 355 because it’s a bit more technical.
3. Okay. You’ve registered and led, what do you have to do to win?
4. The rst thing you have to prove is that the sleazeball actually copied
your work. Since most infringers don’t say “Yeah, I copied your song”
(though some do, as you’ll see), you have to prove they did. Maybe
someone saw them copying your song. Or maybe they recorded their
writing sessions and those recordings show that they were thinking of
your song at the time. Or maybe my dog will learn to play the bagpipes.
In other words, you almost never have any evidence of copying.
Usually, you have to prove they copied your song by showing the court
that your work and theirs have a striking similarity. Striking
similarity is a legal term that means the two songs are so much alike that
it can only be explained by copying.
And of course this also rarely happens (though it can). Most thieves
are smart enough to change the work a bit. Now what?

Even if there’s no striking similarity between your song and theirs,
you’re not dead yet. You can still win if you prove that (a) there is
substantial similarity (this is a lower standard than “striking
similarity”) between your work and theirs, and (b) the infringer had
access to your work.
There’s no bright line for what substantial similarity means, and
because each case is unique, there’s not much guidance. The courts say it
means more than “insubstantial” (duh), and more than “insigni cant.”
If what was taken was really minimal (but of course attorneys have to use
fancier words than that, so it’s called de minimis), there’s no
infringement. If it was substantially similar and not de minimis, it’s an
infringement.
The second part of the test is access. Access is a legal term that means
they had a reasonable way to hear your song and rip it o . For example,
someone gave your song to an artist, hoping they’d record it, and that
artist later wrote a song that was substantially similar to yours.
In the early days of the Internet, some courts assumed there was
access if your song was posted on the Web, even if you only had twelve
hits. But that’s been cut way back. With billions of postings on
YouTube, the access test now requires that your song be very widely
known (for example, in the top 50 on a credible record chart), or that it
was in a genre that the thief listened to a lot, or in a section of the
Internet where the thief went repeatedly. Things like that.
By the way, you don’t need to prove there was access if you can show
striking similarity (the test we rst discussed) between your song and
theirs. That’s because of a concept called presumed access, which means
a court will “presume” the thief had access to your song if the two works
are strikingly similar. However, if they’re only substantially similar, you
need to show access.
5. Okay, you’ve shown access and substantial similarity. Do you win?
Maybe…
Even if there’s substantial similarity and access, there’s no
infringement if the infringer can prove they independently created their

song. In other words, if someone writes a substantially similar song all
on their own, without rst hearing your song, there’s no copyright
infringement—no matter how close the two songs are.
A particularly interesting case in this area involved George Harrison,
who was found guilty of copying the song “He’s So Fine” in his song
“My Sweet Lord.” George claimed he created “My Sweet Lord” without
even thinking about “He’s So Fine,” and what’s unusual about this case
is that the court actually believed him.
But he still lost.
This case created a principle we call unconscious copying. That
means he copied without being aware of it, because the song was very
well known and somewhere buried in his brain. (For the legally inclined,
the citation is Bright Tunes Music Corp. v. Harrisongs Music, Ltd., 420
F. Supp. 177, 1976.)
6. Okay, you proved that this scumbag had access and didn’t create his work
on his own. Now you’re a ways down the track. How far?
The next test is whether or not the material he copied is protected by
copyright. In other words, you have to prove what he copied from your
song was original to you. This means two things: (1) you have to show
that you created the material yourself (rather than copying it from
someone else) and (2) what you wrote has some degree of creativity. For
example, regarding (1), if you borrowed your melody from Mozart note
for note, you didn’t create anything, and the thief is free to use that
melody. Or regarding (2), if your lyrics were “I love you with all my
heart. You mean everything to me,” they’d not only be boring, but also
so commonplace that they don’t have enough creativity to be
copyrightable. (If you’re into reading legal opinions about this concept,
check out the “Stairway to Heaven” and “Dark Horse” cases mentioned
on page 331.)
A very signi cant case about originality is the Rentmeester case,
where a photographer took the original picture of Michael Jordan in his
famous jumpman pose. That’s the one where he’s leaping in the air with
his legs split and his arm extended holding a basketball. (I’d be happy to

print it here, but I don’t want to get sued for copyright infringement.
Google it.)
Nike liked what he did and licensed copies of the photo from
Rentmeester for very limited use. Then they decided to use the image in
a major way, but instead of paying the photographer for more rights to
use the picture, they staged their own photo of Michael Jordan in the
same pose.
Mr. Rentmeester was not pleased. So he sued Nike, claiming they’d
infringed the copyright in his photo by duplicating the pose.
And Mr. Rentmeester was even less pleased when the court tossed
out his case, saying that he couldn’t claim copyright infringement.
I don’t know anything about ballet, but apparently Jordan’s pose was
inspired by a dance move known as a grand jeté (sounds more like a
jacuzzi part to me, but whatever). At any rate, grand jetés existed long
before Rentmeester did. Also, the Nike photo was in a di erent location,
meaning it had a di erent background and a di erent hoop. So even
though Nike admitted copying the concept, the court (the law court, not
the basketball court) decided there was no infringement because none of
Rentmeester’s original elements were used. (This case also illustrates the
principle that you can’t copyright an idea, just the expression of that
idea.)
So the score is Nike 1, Rentmeester 0. (If you want to relive his
sorrow, it’s all spelled out in Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d 1111
[2018].)
The fact that the dance move preexisted the Rentmeester photo leads
us nicely into another aspect of copyright infringement known as prior
art. That means, as the name implies, that you can’t claim you created
something that existed before you created your work. This is an
especially important element in music cases, as there are only twelve
notes in a scale and they’ve been used a lot. In other words, if the thief
copied a phrase in your song that’s the same as a phrase used in forty
songs that existed way before yours (prior art), you can’t claim enough
originality to sustain an infringement suit.

Another aspect of this issue is whether the infringed materials were
just following a well-worn path of prior art. In other words, if the
infringed material has to naturally ow from the genre or idea of the
material, it’s not protectable. For example, in the lm area, if you make a
space movie, it’s not protectable just to have spaceships, aliens, ray-gun
battles, and things like that. And in music, there are standard blues chord
progressions that you pretty much have to use (if you want to write the
blues, anyway). Or if your song is a waltz, it has to be in 3/4 time.
7. So let’s say you’re through those hoops. You’ve shown that the material
they stole from you is original and protected. What’s next?
Wheel out the operating table, because the court will now dissect
your work. If your song has some original elements and some that aren’t
original, they’re going to toss out everything that isn’t original. That’s
because you can only sue over stu that’s protected by copyright,
meaning original material created by you. For example, if you wrote
new lyrics to the tune of “Old MacDonald,” you couldn’t sue over the
melody, just over your new lyrics. Or if you wrote something using the
standard blues progression, you couldn’t sue over that chord structure,
just your words and melody.
This dissecting is done very clinically. Experts make up charts of both
songs, compare recordings of your song to recordings of the other song,
and then argue about what it all means. When they’re done yelling, the
court decides which parts are protected and which aren’t. They then
compare your protected parts against the thief’s work to see if there is
substantial similarity between the two (the test I mentioned earlier). If
there is, we’re on to the next hurdle. If not, you’re o see the
Rentmeester.
8. Well… you’ve shown that they copied protected material from you, and
that their work is substantially similar to your protected work, and it’s
not de minimis. Are we there yet? Are we there yet?
No, honey, but I’ll let you know when we are and I’ll buy you an ice
cream.

The tests above are all reasonably cut-and-dried. The way that the
experts look at the words, notes, chord progressions, prior art, etc., is an
objective test, based on the bones of the two works. Sort of like taking
two pieces of paper with similar writing, putting one on top of the other,
and holding them up to the light to see how much alike they are. Once
you get past that, you arrive at the next test, which is a subjective one. In
essence, that means, “Does it sound like an infringement?” Even if it
looks very close on the objective scale, would someone listening to it
think it came from your work? Or vice-versa; the two works may not
look so close in an objective comparison, but may sound very much
alike.
If the answer is yes, they sound alike, do you win? Probably, but…
9. Even if the works sound alike and you prove the thief stole a protectable
part of your work, the infringer may argue that his song is something
called fair use. And if that’s true, you lose.
Fair use is a complicated (though pretty interesting) area of the law
that says you’re allowed to use parts of someone’s work for certain
purposes without permission (and without paying them). In other
words, if you meet the legal tests, so that you’ve made a “fair use” of the
work, there’s no copyright infringement.
The fair use criteria are in Section 107 of the Copyright Act, but
they’re only a general description (as you’ll see). The reality is that every
fair use case is very fact-speci c. Which of course makes lawyers happy,
because we get to argue about which foot will t into the Cinderella
slipper.
Here’s what the Copyright Act says:
A fair use is not a copyright infringement if it’s “for purposes such as
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies
for classroom use), scholarship, or research.” It then lists things you
should consider in deciding whether you went over the line into
infringement territory. However, it says the factors determining fair use
include the things on their list, which means you can look at other stu
as well. (See what I mean about it being a “general description”?)

Anyway, here’s the list in Section 107. To determine if there’s a fair
use, you need to look at:
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether it’s a
commercial use or nonpro t educational purposes. It’s okay if
there’s some commercial aspect involved, but the more there is,
the stricter the test.
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work (the one that’s been copied).
The courts have distinguished between creative works (songs,
novels, paintings, etc.) and factual works, such as non ction
books and directories. Creative works have more protection, as
you’d expect.
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to
the copyrighted work as a whole. The general principle is that the
more that’s used, the less likely it’s fair use. However, there’s an
argument that using even a small portion that is the “heart” of a
work could go over the line.
(4) the e ect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
copyrighted work. The question here is whether the new work
would be a substitute for the original in the marketplace and
therefore nancially hurt the original. For example, a Saturday
Night Live parody sketch of a movie isn’t going to hurt the
market for the movie; in fact, it most likely helps. But a parody
song that uses most of the elements of the original song might in
fact be a substitute for the original.
As you can gather, fair use is very fact-speci c, meaning it’s hard to
know with certainty whether you’ve got one. An easy example would be
a professor at a nonpro t college who copies a few paragraphs from a
book into a classroom handout (clearly a fair use) versus someone who
copies an entire book and sells it to the students (clearly not). In
between, things get hazy.

A major issue that’s come out of the courts in determining fair use is
whether the use is transformative. This concept started with a music
case that went all the way to the Supreme Court, over 2 Live Crew using
the lyrics of “Pretty Woman” in a rap song. The background is that they
tried to license the song, got turned down, then went ahead anyway. So
the owners of the song sued them for infringement. To the industry’s
surprise, the Supreme Court held there was no infringement because the
new use parodied the original song by satirizing the idea of what was
“pretty,” and used the song in an entirely di erent setting. The case is
Campbell v. Acuﬀ-Rose Music, 510 U.S. 569 (1994).
Since then, there have been a number of cases on transformation,
including some fun things like superimposing Leslie Nielsen’s head on
the pregnant body of Demi Moore (that was held to be transformative
and a fair use). If you want to see an assortment of goodies to better
understand the concept, Google “transformative use copyright cases.”
To make this even more fun, the courts in various parts of the
country have a di erence of opinion. Two of the circuit courts held that
using copyrighted material to create another work is transformative and
fair use, but one circuit said it’s an infringement because it’s just a
derivative work (see page 217 for what “derivative work” means).
Unless and until the Supreme Court weighs in, we’ll continue to live
in Fuzzy Land.
Okay, honey, we’re there. What avor ice cream do you want?

I Won!… Now What?
If you prove someone infringed your copyright, what do you get? Some of this
is peculiar to the copyright (and also trademark) world. Here’s how it works:
1. You get the fair market value of the use they made.
For example, if they rip o your song in a commercial, and that use of
the song is worth $25,000 in a marketplace deal, you can get $25,000.
2. You can recover the infringer’s pro ts.

If the sleazeball made a pro t using your work, you can recover
whatever share of his pro ts are attributable to the infringement, which
may be more than the fair market value of the usage. (If you pick this
remedy, you don’t also get fair market value.)
3. You can get an injunction.
That means the court enjoins (stops the infringer from using) the
infringing work. If they continue to use it anyway, they’re subject to
substantial nes, and sometimes even jail.
4. You can recover statutory damages.
Statutory damages are a real copyright original. This is where you can’t
prove actual damages—for example, your infringer was not only a thief,
but also a bungling businessman, and he lost money with your rip-o .
Or maybe his pro ts are so well hidden that you can’t nd them. In this
case, if you registered the copyright before the infringement
commenced, the court can give you anywhere from $750 to $30,000 for
a single work (this is per work infringed, not the number of copies
actually made; for example, streaming a song one million times is still
only one act of infringement). The judge can raise this to $150,000 if it’s
a willful (intentional) infringement, and can lower it to $200 for an
“innocent” infringement.
5. The court can order destruction or seizure.
The court can grab, or make the scumball destroy, all the infringing
copies. This is also not a common remedy outside the copyright area.
6. If the infringement is willful, there are criminal penalties.
An interesting bit of history is that the Marx Brothers stole some poor
schlub’s copyrighted routine for a radio show and were convicted of
criminal copyright infringement.
7. You can get your costs.
You can get back your court costs and, to a limited extent, you can
recover your attorney’s fees. The latter is unusual, because you usually
don’t get attorney’s fees even if you win a lawsuit.

A relatively recent development is that we now have a Copyright Small
Claims Court, which as the name implies, is a place for itty-bitty infringements.
The maximum recovery is $30,000, and the statutory damages we just discussed
are limited to $15,000 (rather than $30,000 to $150,000). Also, there’s no
recovery of attorney’s fees, unless the suit was led in bad faith, and you can’t
get an injunction or destruction of goods (see the prior section) without both
sides agreeing. You can recover costs, but they’re capped at $15,000.
This new court was set up by the Copyright Alternative in Small-Claims
Enforcement Act of 2020 (the CASE Act). It’s a three-judge panel, called a
tribunal (get it? “tri” equals “three,” like a tricycle), who are knowledgeable in
copyright issues. You have to use these folks; you can’t have a jury.
Unlike federal court, you don’t need to have a lawyer representing you,
though you can. The proceedings are informal; there’s generally no personal
appearances. Discovery (meaning asking the other side about their case and
requesting documents) is all done in writing, and there are no rules of evidence
or expert witnesses. There’s also no trial. The tribunal just looks at the evidence
and decides who wins.
Going to small claims court is entirely voluntary, meaning both sides have to
agree. In other words, if the person you sue wants to take the case to federal
court, they can. But there are reasons why they may not. For example, their
damages are capped in small claims court, but they aren’t in federal court, so the
risk is much greater there. Also, if the case is small enough, they may leave it in
small claims court because it will be more expensive to hire lawyers and go
through the formal proceedings of a federal court. I mean, why make a federal
case out of it…? (I heard that groan).

ARTIFICAL INTELLIGENCE AND MONKEY SELFIES
There are a lot of issues these days about music (and other materials) created by
arti cial intelligence (AI). The creative programs are known as generative
arti cial intelligence, and they’re cranking out some fascinating copyright
questions.

We talked about AI’s dilution e ect on human-created music on page 143,
but now you have enough knowledge to take a deeper dive. You may want to
hold your nose for more reasons that just the depth of the water.
AI programs can now do a pretty good job of creating music (as well as
images, stories, and all sorts of other goodies). For example, you could ask it to
create spa music, and in a few hours, you’ll have enough for twelve thousand
massages. But if you thought the ownership of copyright issues we previously
discussed were complicated, wait’ll you get a load of this one.
Here’s the key copyright question : Who’s the author of an AI work?
The choices would seem to be (a) the person who created the AI program,
(b) the person who told the program what to do (“I want a polka band to play
funeral music with the Juilliard string quartet”), (c) all of the above, or (d) no
one.
What do you think?
Well, this area of the law is still nding its sea legs, so your guess is as good as
everyone else’s. But so far, (d) (no one) is winning.
Let me explain how we got there.
It’s been established in U.S. law for a while that you can’t have a copyright
without human creativity. In 1997, the Ninth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals
dealt with a case by the Urantia Foundation, a religious group whose sacred text
was written by “non-human spiritual beings” who used a human to channel the
messages and write down the words. Someone outside Urantia decided to
publish their text, and the Urantians were not pleased, so they sued for
copyright infringement. Unfortunately, the spirits weren’t with them in the
lawsuit and the court said that divine beings can’t be authors, only humans can.
So no copyright. For more details, check out Urantia Foundation v. Kristen
Maaherra, 114 F.3d 955, 957–59 (9th Cir. 1997), or wait for the movie on
Net ix (just kidding about the movie).
Next came an even more fun situation, the Case of the Monkey Sel e.
Naruto was a seven-year-old crested macaque (not that I’d know a crested
macaque from a non-crested one, nor in fact would I know a macaque from a
baboon). Naruto lived on the island of Sulawesi, Indonesia, and David Slater
was a wildlife photographer who went there to take pictures of the monkeys.

One day, David left his camera unattended and Naruto came by. He grinned
for the camera while pressing the shutter button. The result was a close-up sel e
that Slater put in a book, and Naruto sued him for copyright infringement.
Yep, you read that right. The monkey sued for copyright infringement.
Well, Naruto didn’t actually bring the lawsuit himself; he probably didn’t
care as long as he had a good supply of fruit, crabs, and insects. The case was
brought by PETA, the world’s largest society for protection of animals, on
behalf of Naruto.
Urantia’s non-human spirits weren’t with Naruto either. The court
dismissed his case on technical grounds, namely that PETA didn’t have the right
to bring the suit, but it also said that non-humans can’t create copyrights. (If
you want a play by play, the case is Naruto v. Slater, No. 16-15469 (9th Cir.
2018).
Here’s what Naruto looks like (in case you happen to be in Sulawesi and
want to say Hi). I can reproduce this image because I know Naruto and Slater
can’t sue me.

Image courtesy of Monkeys Can’t Copyright Selﬁes, Inc.

And now to AI. There are no decided cases on this yet, but in 2018, and
again in 2022, the Copyright O ce refused to register works created by AI. A
man named Steven Thaler had an AI program that ran on a machine he called
“the Creativity Machine.” Thaler had the machine create a two-dimensional
image, then he tried to register it with the Copyright O ce, claiming it was a

work for hire. In addition, he argued that the requirement of human
authorship is unconstitutional.
The Copyright O ce disagreed. First, based on the above cases and others,
they said there needs to be a human author. Second, they said it can’t be a work
for hire because that can only be created by a binding legal agreement, and the
Creativity Machine can’t enter into contracts. Also, they said work for hire only
speaks to copyright ownership, not whether the work is copyrightable. And to
be copyrightable, the author has to be human. They also said that Thaler didn’t
specify what creativity he himself contributed in telling the program what to do.
(If you want more detail, here’s a link to the Copyright O ce’s letter rejecting
Thaler’s
registration:
https://www.copyright.gov/rulings- lings/reviewboard/docs/a-recent-entrance-to-paradise.pdf.)
So no human, no copyright. Or as Naruta would say, “oo-ah, eek-eek, aww.”
However, refusal to register is not the same as a court ruling. In essence, the
Copyright O ce is punting this issue to the courts to decide, and Thaler, who
didn’t go quietly into the night, is currently suing the Copyright O ce over
this question.
More recently, Kris Kashtanova submitted a graphic novel called Zarya of
the Dawn to the Copyright O ce. Kris got a copyright registration for the
work, but the Copyright O ce later found out that they (Kris is nonbinary)
only wrote the text and had AI create the images. The Copyright O ce then
held hearings and revised the registration.
In the end, the Copyright O ce registered the text (written by the very
human Kris) but said the images could only be protected as a “compilation.” As
we discussed on page 321, you can get a compilation copyright for arranging
and selecting non-copyrighted works. Since the AI generated images had no
human authorship and therefore no copyright, Kris could only claim copyright
in how they were compiled. In other words, there is a copyright registration for
the selection and arrangement of the images, but no copyright in the individual
images.
There are arguments why AI works should be copyrightable, at least in some
cases. For example, in Thaler, there was nothing in his application saying that he
input any creativity into his AI machine. And it makes sense that if human

input was really generic—like “Create an image of a wrestling match”—there’s
no originality. Suppose, however, that you put in some things like, “Create a
wrestling match between Vladimir Putin and Abraham Lincoln, each dressed
in leopard skins, on a rooftop in Mumbai, where everyone in the audience is
purple.” Not sure why anyone would want that, but hey, it’s kinda creative.
Kinda… Is that enough human creativity to qualify?
Or in the music area, what if you write the melody for a song and ask the AI
to add lyrics? If you don’t describe the lyrics, under the current state of the law,
you would only have the copyright in your music. But if you were pretty
speci c about the lyrics, could you get some protection? Maybe?
There is also precedent with David Cope, who created two albums with the
assistance of a computer and was able to get copyright protection by showing
that the AI was only a part of his creation. That worked because he apparently
had enough human input.
A related copyright issue concerns the AI programs themselves. They need
to be “trained” by ingesting massive amounts of material, which includes
copyrighted works. Does that violate the copyright law? Is the AI’s output an
unlicensed creation of a derivative work? (See page 217 for what a derivative
work is.) There are already lawsuits on behalf of folks (like Getty Images) whose
material was ingested, claiming just this. Will they win? Or is it a fair use, since
the work is transformative? Probably didn’t help that the AI’s product in one
case included a blurry Getty watermark…
At the bottom of this is a policy issue that in theory should be decided by
Congress (not that they can decide much of anything these days). Should nonhuman creativity be copyrightable? If so, under what circumstances? And who
should own those copyrights? The person creating the AI? The person telling it
what to do? Both? If both, who controls the copyright? Do you have to go to
the AI creator for permission every time you want to use the work? What if the
AI work infringes on someone else’s material? Who’s responsible for that?
By the way, countries outside the U.S. may not be so precious about the
human element. Apparently, Thaler registered his image in Australia and South
Africa as a patent (the protection you get for inventing something), listing the
AI as the inventor and Thaler as the owner. He also tried the same thing in the

UK, but as I’m writing this, a UK court ruled that a machine can’t be an
inventor, so they denied the patent.
There’s also a related issue on the recorded music side that hasn’t yet come to
life. Turns out there are only a limited number of countries that have
copyrights in sound recordings (we’ll talk about those in the next chapter. but
basically it means copyrights in the recording, as opposed to copyrights in the
song). They have sound recording copyrights in places with an English
tradition, like the UK, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and some West
Africa countries. To get a sound recording copyright there, you need an author
and originality.
However, in all of the EU and other places, they don’t have sound recording
copyrights. Instead, they protect labels and performers with Neighboring
Rights (we discussed these on page 324; to simplify, Neighboring Rights allow
you to get paid for the distribution and performance of the recordings). But
unlike a copyright, there’s no requirement of human creativity for Neighboring
Rights. So AI recordings would be protected in those places, even if they were
just bird sounds. Or monkey sounds…
This protection goes to the record company, performer, and producer, and
it’s not clear who would be the “performer” in AI, so it might just be the
“producer,” which would mean the actual producer and the record company.
Also, note that Neighboring Rights don’t extend to the songwriter. So you
could end up with something that is protected as a recording, but there’s no
copyright in the song.
Just as I’m writing this (every time I think it’s done, something new
happens…) there’s been a lot of press about celebrity soundalike recordings
created by AI, such as a track that mimicked Drake and the Weeknd. In that
case, the song was also created by AI, so as we discussed, there may be no
copyright in any of it. But imitating celebrities also raises issues beyond
copyright, such as a potential trademark infringement by using their names
(though if it’s clearly identi ed as not being the celebrity, the law isn’t 100%
clear on this), and also the right of someone to own their name and likeness for
commercial purposes, which is a right under some state and foreign laws.

The proliferation of AI music is also a concern because it dilutes the
streaming money that would go to human artists who have spent a lot of time
and money honing their talent and building a career (we discussed dilution on
page 143). If there’s a lot of AI music for which no one gets royalties, and it
reduces what the artists and labels get, there will be some very unhappy
campers.
In sum, there are no clear answers (other than what’s above, which is that
there’s no copyright today), but that may not be the nal word. This area
should get very interesting over the coming years (or weeks), as AI becomes
more prevalent and more sophisticated. Stay tuned, sports fans.
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track and are in a group, go to Part IV
(Chapter 21) on page 361.
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track and you’re not in a group, go to Part V
(Chapter 23) on page 389.
Experts, keep rollin’.

20
Even More Advanced Copyright Concepts

SOUND RECORDING COPYRIGHTS
This section is about copyrights in sound recordings, with the artist’s voice and
musicians on it (not the musical compositions they’re singing).
It may surprise you to know that, prior to 1972, the United States had no
copyright protection for a sound recording itself. That includes Elvis, the
Beatles, and all kinds of other classics. And before 1972, pirates were making a
lot of money by duplicating sound recordings and not paying anyone.
This smelled like thievery (which it was), but stopping them was di cult
because there was no federal copyright in the sound recording. Because of that,
the companies had to sue pirates under the copyright laws of individual states,
and they did reasonably well, but it was clunky.
In 1972, Congress enacted a full- edged, legitimate copyright law provision
dealing with piracy (which is now Section 114 of the Copyright Act). It
prohibits the unauthorized duplication or dubbing of a sound recording that
was created on or after February 15, 1972, by creating a copyright in the actual
recording. (This is in addition to a separate copyright in the musical
composition.) It is imaginatively called a sound recording copyright.
One of the most interesting aspects of this sound recording copyright is what
it did not protect. While it’s clear you can no longer duplicate the actual
recording without consent, the sound recording copyright doesn’t prohibit a
“sound-alike” recording, no matter how closely you duplicate the original. In

other words, nothing in the sound recording copyright stops you from hiring a
singer to imitate the original artist, or hiring a band that sounds just like the
original recording, regardless of how close you come. Of course, you still need
to license the song, and you have to disclose that the recording isn’t the original.
If you didn’t label your record as an imitation, you’d run afoul of various
trademark and unfair practices laws, which deal with the proper labeling of
goods (and thus stop you from defrauding the public into thinking they’re
getting the original when they’re not). These are the same laws that stop you
from calling a cereal Froot Loops if it’s not made by Kellogg’s, even if it has
exactly the same ingredients.

Not So Happy Together
So the sound recording copyright is good for recordings created after February
15, 1972, but there’s no federal sound recording copyright for pre-’72
recordings. Recently, that little quirk came back to life like some monster in an
old horror movie. And the villains this time?
The digital streaming services (our old friends, the DSPs).
Remember, as we discussed on page 144, the DSPs pay out each month on
the basis of how many plays you get compared to the total number of plays on
their service. Well, these oldies had a fair amount of play, so they should’ve
gotten some of the money. But the DSPs said they didn’t have to pay for them
because there was no sound recording copyright. Accordingly, they allocated a
share of their revenue to the old recordings (based on their number of plays),
carved that chunk out of what they paid everyone else, and stuck it in their
pockets.
As you can imagine, the recordings of classic artists get a helluva lot of play
on these services, so those owners of those recordings (as well as the copyright
recordings that were getting shorted on money) were not pleased. This led to a
number of lawsuits over this issue, essentially using the state laws that were used
to shut down pirates before the sound recording copyright existed.
The biggest case was headed by the RIAA (an industry group that represents
the major labels), and there was also a class action led by the Turtles (class

action means a lawsuit on behalf of everyone similarly situated, which in this
case meant everyone who owned pre-1972 recordings and wasn’t suing on their
own).
The result was mixed—some states said there was protection, while others
said there was no performance right in the sound recordings. The cases have
settled, but all this litigation shook up the streaming services enough to support
a section of the Music Modernization Act (see page 248) called the Classics
Protection and Access Act. The Classics Protection section says it’s not
creating a copyright for the pre-1972 recordings, but instead gives the owner of
a pre-’72 recording the same rights to collect money as owners of post-’72
recordings. In essence, for interactive services, this means the labels now license
pre-1972 recordings to the DSPs on the same terms as post-’72 recordings. For
non-interactive uses, the Classics Act says the pre-1972 recordings are subject to
the same compulsory licenses as the new stu , meaning they get paid by
SoundExchange at the same rate as post-’72 recordings.
Interestingly, unlike federal copyrights, state law copyrights have no
expiration; so in theory the old stu could have been subject to payment longer
than the new recordings (like… forever). Under the MMA, however, there is
now a limit on how long you can get paid for pre-1972 recordings. Speci cally,
it’s ninety- ve years from rst publication (meaning release to the public), but
there are some extensions of this ninety- ve years for older recordings. If a
recording was rst published before 1923, you had until December 31, 2021. If
it was rst published between 1923 and 1946, you get ve years beyond the
ninety- ve years. If it was rst published between 1947 and 1956, you get an
extra fteen years on top of the ninety- ve.
The party’s over for all pre-1972 recordings on February 15, 2067 (ninetyve years after the e ective date of the 1972 sound recording act).

HOW TO TERMINATE A COPYRIGHT TRANSFER IN
YOUR SPARE TIME, FOR FUN AND PROFIT
As noted on page 323, the 1976 Copyright Act lets you undo any deal (for
songs created on or after January 1, 1978) thirty- ve years later (we’ll talk about

the pre-1978 songs later, on page 348). So if you sell your song to a publisher
and have a lifetime of regret, you can get it back after thirty- ve years by merely
sending a notice (remember, this is only for the United States; you’re still stuck
for the rest of the world).
Here’s how to do it.
You can give a notice of termination no less than two years, nor more than
ten years, before the date that your termination is to be e ective, and that
e ective date has to be within ve years after the end of the thirty- ve-year
period. To be more precise, if the grant of the work covers publication, which it
almost always does, the right to terminate is e ective on the sooner of forty
years from the grant, or thirty- ve years from publication. This protects you
even if the work is never published.
This is easier to understand if we use some actual years. For example, if a
copyright was transferred and published in 2000:
Year of Transfer/Publication: 2000

Years in Which Termination Can Be E ective
(From 35 to 40 Years After Transfer/Publication):
2035 to 2040
First Year That Notice Can Be Sent (10 Years Before Last Year That Notice Can Be Sent (2 Years Before
First Possible E ective Date): 2025
Last Possible E ective Date): 2038

If you really want to know the details, take a look at Sections 203 and 304 of
the Copyright Act, which you can nd online.
The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, which we discussed on
page 323, added some frills to this. They are:
1. Previously, only a living author, surviving spouse, or surviving children
or grandchildren could exercise the right of termination. Now, if none
of them are alive, the author’s estate can do the honors.
2. There’s a second bite at termination rights for pre-1978 copyrights,
which I’ll go over in a minute.
Remember, as we discussed previously, this termination only applies to U.S.
rights. If you sold o your copyright in foreign territories, Quel dommage.

Attempts to Avoid Termination
As much as the publishers would love to avoid termination, Uncle Sam says,
“No.” The copyright law says that nothing you do with the termination rights is
valid until you actually have the rights back—in other words, you can’t sign
them over to anyone until you actually have them in your st. The only
exception is that you can make a deal with the guy whose rights are about to be
terminated after you’ve sent the notice. For example, if you send a notice to the
publisher saying the termination is e ective three years from now, you can
enter into a contract with that publisher during the three years before the rights
come back. This gives the current publisher a head start, because they can make
a deal (and pay you for the rights) before anyone else can.

EXTENSION RIGHTS
Extension Recapture
So Congress took care of folks who wrote songs in 1978 and after, by giving
them the right to get out of a stupid deal after thirty- ve years. But what about
the oldsters who made stupid deals?
There’s a transitional quirk thrown into the 1976 Copyright Act that takes
care of the pre-1978 copyrights. (If you weren’t writing prior to 1978, or aren’t
the heir of such a writer, you can skip to the next section on terminating sound
recording copyrights. This isn’t mandatory; feel free to read this for your
general education, but I don’t suggest driving or operating heavy machinery
afterward.)
As we touched on earlier, pre-1978 copyrights lasted for a period of fty-six
years (the twenty-eight plus twenty-eight we discussed on page 322). The 1976
act extended that to a period of seventy- ve years, meaning it added nineteen
years to the fty-six years that already existed. And as we also discussed, this has
now been extended to ninety- ve years.
In 1976, in addition to extending the life of the copyrights to seventy- ve
years, your congresspeople gave the author (or his or her heirs) the right to take
back the new nineteen years. The recapture procedure is similar to that for

termination rights of post-1978 copyrights (the right to terminate after thirtyve years, which we discussed in the prior section). It’s done by giving a notice
no sooner than two years, and no more than ten years, before the beginning of
the nineteen years (i.e., no more than two years, or later than ten years, before
the end of the fty-sixth year).
For example, if a song was rst published in 1972, the fty-six years expire in
2028. So, beginning in 2018 (ten years before the end of the fty-six years), and
ending in 2026 (two years before), you can give a notice to be e ective in 2026.
After the e ective date of the notice, the nineteen years added to the copyright
(the extension from 2026 to 2045) belong to the author, or his or her heirs. As
with post-1978 termination rights, this is only for the United States. The rest of
the world has still gone bye-bye.
Just like the thirty- ve-year termination, Congress gave the original
publishers a nice perk. The law says that, before the extended term actually
comes into e ect, but after giving a termination notice, the person who got the
original grant can make a new deal for the added nineteen years. So the original
publisher has the ability to buy the rights at least two years before any outsider,
and therefore has an advantage in getting them. Unless the publisher has really
been a jerk during the rst fty-six years (which is no small “unless”), it can
usually keep the copyrights.
Now enter the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998, which
added twenty years to the copyright term and made the extension period thirtynine years after the original fty-six years (in other words, a total of ninety- ve
years). They also threw in (at no extra charge) an added bonus: If your right to
recapture came up before October 27, 1998, and you forgot to send the
termination notice, you get another bite. At any time within ve years after
expiration of the rst seventy- ve years (the old fty-six, plus the nineteen you
blew), you can get back the newly added twenty years.

What Exactly Did I Just Get Back?
So you’ve sent your notices, waited until the magic date to get your rights back,
and are ready to rumble. What exactly did you just get handed? Can you now

do anything you want with those rights?
Well, it’s not exactly simple…
A provision of the termination/extension law rights says that the original
publisher can no longer license any new works, but they can continue
exploiting derivative works created while they owned the song (see page 217 for
a de nition of derivative works). And for a while, this derivative work exception
looked like it was going to be a loophole you could drive a truck through. The
opening act was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving the appropriately titled
song “Who’s Sorry Now.” (If you want to look it up, it’s Mills Music v. Snyder,
105 SCT 638 [1985].) In this case, the publisher (Mills Music) acquired the
rights to “Who’s Sorry Now” from Ted Snyder and two other writers. Snyder
went to that Great Songbook in the Sky, and in 1978, his heirs exercised their
right to terminate the last nineteen years. (So much for the idea that the initial
publisher can hang on to the songs.)
After termination, Mills Music argued that all of the records it had licensed
were derivative works, and therefore it had the right to collect mechanical
royalties for sales of these records after termination. As you can imagine, Mr.
Snyder’s heirs took a contrary view. They felt these rights should come back to
them, so they could then license the record companies (and get all the money).
The decision ipped back and forth until it came to the U.S. Supreme Court
(known to its friends as “the Supremes”). In a closely divided decision ( ve of
the nine justices in favor, four opposing), the Supreme Court found that indeed
the records were derivative works, and that the money from them went to Mills
Music, the terminated publisher. Mr. Snyder’s heirs had the right to money
from future recordings, but not the existing ones. Sorry, all you little Snyders.
After Mills Music, two other cases dealt with the scope of a publisher’s right
to hang on to derivative works. The rst was Woods v. Bourne Co., 603 F.2d 978
(2d Cir. 1995), where the terminated publisher argued that every piece of
printed music was based on the original lead sheet, and therefore the right to
put out sheet music forever belonged to the old publisher (see page 297 for
what a lead sheet is). The court kicked the publishers’ butts on that one, holding

that new versions of printed music weren’t derivative works and therefore
belonged to the new publisher.
Next came Fred Ahlert Music Corp. v. Warner Chappell Music, Inc., 155
F.3rd 17 (2d Cir. 1998), where the court made the derivative work exception
even narrower. In that case, the mechanical license issued by the rst publisher
was for a speci c catalog number, and then the same recording was reissued
under a di erent catalog number. The court found that the reissue was not
covered by the rst license, so the new publisher of the song could issue the
mechanical license for it (and get the dough).
Recently, there’s been an argument that language in the Music
Modernization Act means that income from the streaming of recordings made
while a publisher had the rights can be collected by that publisher essentially
forever after the termination. The Copyright O ce recognized that the
language could be read this way and proposed a rule stating that the writer gets
to collect this income after termination. At the time of this writing, the rule is
only tentative, and there’s intense lobbying e orts on both sides. Also, a
Copyright O ce rule is not binding law, so there could be court battles over
this one. Action to come.

Sound Recording Copyright Terminations
The right to terminate transfers of sound recordings, which started coming up
in 2013 (thirty- ve years after the 1978 act), is a fascinating area. What’s
happening is that artists are sending termination notices to record companies,
and the companies are ghting back.
Since the earliest days, record contracts have all had language that says the
sound recordings are “works for hire,” and remember there’s no termination
right for works for hire. (Take a look back at page 319 if you want a refresher on
“works for hire.”) To be a work for hire, however, you need more than just that
language. As we discussed previously, the work has to fall into one of several
speci c categories (see page 320).
One of the “work for hire” categories is a “collective work,” and the record
companies argue that recordings are contributions to a collective work (an

album) and are therefore works for hire. They also throw in any other
arguments they may have in each speci c situation (for example, the form or
timing of the notice might have been defective).
In virtually every instance of which I’m aware, the companies and artists
have come to an agreement to settle the claims. The companies o er better
terms under the deal (higher royalty, advances, etc.), and the artist generally
goes along. In part, this is because a ght would be incredibly expensive, and it’s
also because the stakes for the record labels are very high. If they get a court
decision that says recordings aren’t works for hire, it could cost them all their
old recordings. So they will ght to the death. On the artist side, however,
they’re only ghting about a few recordings that many times don’t earn enough
in the United States to justify the expense of litigation (remember terminations
are only for the U.S.). Also looming in the background is the idea that neither
side necessarily wants a court result—if it favors the company, the artist is stuck
with an old deal, and if it favors the artist, the companies lose massively on their
catalog. So they compromise.
A few years ago, a class action was led in New York on behalf of artists over
this very issue. A “class action” means that it covers everyone who’s similarly
situated, so it’s more economical for them to band together for an expensive
ght. A common example is something like a class lawsuit on behalf of everyone
who bought gas from XYZ stations while XYZ was illegally overcharging.
Maybe everyone gets back only $30, which is not worth a legal ght, but if there
are millions of them, they can ght as a class.
Before you can go forward with a class action, however, there are some
technical hurdles you have to jump. The rst is that you need to form a class
that’s quali ed to sue (this is decided by the court, who has to “certify” that the
class is entitled bring the suit). One requirement of being a valid “class” is that
the members of the class have a common question that is capable of a common
answer. In other words, they all must have the same claim, so that the decision
would apply to all of them. In late breaking news at the time I’m writing this, a
New York court held that the group suing over recordings couldn’t be certi ed
as a “class,” because the speci c facts varied in each situation. I would expect an
appeal, so there may be more action here.

THE COPYRIGHT NOTICE
The copyright notice (other than for sound recordings) is a © followed by the
year of copyright (the year that the work was rst xed in tangible form). The
symbol for sound recordings is Ⓟ. Look for these on your vinyl records. And
on your CDs if you still have any.
The copyright notice is much less signi cant under the 1976 Copyright Act
than they were under the old law, because the consequences of leaving it o , or
making a mistake in it, are no longer very serious. (Under the old law, you
could lose your copyright.) It’s not worth getting into all the niceties, but
nowadays a notice basically just protects you from someone saying they had no
idea the materials were copyrighted—in other words, they can’t say they were
an “innocent infringer.” (You don’t get a free pass if you’re an innocent
infringer, but it could a ect how much you have to pay if you get nailed.)
For songs, the © copyright notice is primarily signi cant for printed music
(digital and physical). That’s because you need only put a notice on “visibly
perceptible copies” of something. Since you can’t “see” a song by looking at a
digital le, CD, or vinyl, there’s no need to have a copyright notice for the song.
So why do you see copyright notices on CDs and vinyl? Good question! The
reasons are:
(a) it’s the sound recording copyright notice;
(b) sometimes the lyrics are printed inside, and since they are “visually
perceptible,” you need a copyright notice; and
(c) there is a copyright in the album cover artwork.

REGISTRATION AND DEPOSIT
The Myth
It’s a myth that you get a copyright by registering your work with the Copyright
O ce. As we discussed, you get a copyright by xing the work in tangible form.
However, registering a copyright with the Copyright O ce gives you certain
legal tidbits you don’t otherwise have (we’ll discuss those next), so you should

always do it if you’re going to commercially exploit your work. But the failure
to register doesn’t a ect the validity of your copyright. So if you’re a beginning
songwriter, it’s probably not worth the money until someone bites.
The old trick of mailing a copy of the work to yourself actually accomplishes
something. It’s sometimes called a “poor man’s copyright,” but that’s not true.
Remember, you already have the copyright by putting it in tangible form. The
only thing you get from mailing it to yourself is a clearly established date on
which you created your work. So if someone rips it o at a later date, you can
prove your work was created before theirs.
If you’re going to do this, send it by certi ed mail and don’t get excited and
open it when it arrives; store it in a safe place, and let a judge open it if someone
ever gets cute.
Having a date-stamped digital le accomplishes the same thing, though I’m
told (anecdotally, not reliably) that digital dates could be manipulated. If that’s
true, then this evidence isn’t as strong as a letter.
If you’ve posted your song to a website, that’s pretty reliable evidence, but
you have to be sure the site keeps track of the date, and of course you need the
site to still be in business when you have an issue.

Why Register? Let me count the ways…
If your work is going to be commercially exploited (released on streaming or in
a physical format, used in a lm, a commercial, etc.), you should register with
the Copyright O ce. If you don’t, you lose the following goodies:
1. You can’t collect compulsory license royalties (see page 218).
2. As we discussed earlier, you can’t le an infringement action unless
you’ve rst registered the copyright. That means you can’t recover
damages or stop someone from using your song until you’ve registered.
You’re allowed to wait and register just before you le the lawsuit, but
it’s a better idea to take care of it as soon as you know there’s going to be
a recording (because of numbers 3, 4, and 5 below).

3. A Supreme Court case held that you must have a registration in your
hand before you can le your lawsuit. (For Supreme Court stalkers, the
case is Fourth Estate Public Beneﬁt Corporation vs. Wall-Street.com, 138
S.Ct. 720 [2018]).
Before that case, some of the lower courts said it was enough for you
to have ﬁled the registration, but now it actually has to be issued
(meaning the Copyright O ce has o cially accepted it in their records)
before you can sue. And waiting for the government to grind your
registration through its gears can mean a delay of up to nine months
after you send in the registration form. Which means a delay before you
can le your lawsuit. So today it’s an even better idea to get going early if
you’ve got a record coming out.
4. If you don’t register within ve years after rst publication of the work,
you lose the legal presumption that everything in the registration is
valid. This mumbo jumbo basically means that if you do register within
the ve years, a court will assume that everything in your registration is
true, and the infringer has the burden of proving it’s not. If you don’t,
you have to prove it’s true.
5. You can’t recover attorney’s fees, nor can you get statutory damages
(see page 339), unless you registered before the infringement happened.
You can get the forms you need to register (and in fact register electronically)
at www.copyright.gov, unless that’s now become a dating site.

Deposit
A separate requirement from registration is the obligation to deposit copies of
“the best edition” of your work within three months after publication. If you
don’t, there’s no loss of copyright, but there are penalties and nes. The purpose
of this is to keep the Library of Congress over owing with tons of crap that
nobody has ever heard of, and the system works quite well. You can deposit
CDs, vinyl, or sheet music for songs, or if your work is unpublished, or
published only in electronic form, you can deposit electronically.

MORAL RIGHTS
In a number of countries outside the United States, there’s a legal concept
known as moral rights, or by the snooty term droit moral (which in French
means “moral rights,” and in Czech means “no parking”). The concept (among
others) is that an author can stop any mutilation of his or her work, even though
they may have parted with it long ago. For example, the creator of a painting
(even though it’s been sold four or ve times) could stop someone from cutting
it into smaller paintings, drawing mustaches on it, etc. Similarly, the author of a
musical work can stop substantial changes in the music or lyrics. And you also
get the right to stop someone from falsely attributing your work to someone
else.
The United States has never recognized a moral rights concept for music
(even though it is required to do it under something called the Berne
Convention, which is a multi-nation treaty designed to protect creative works).
The best we’ve done is a limited moral right for paintings and ne art.
Accordingly, to the extent you want any protection, you gotta put it in your
songwriter/publisher contract, as we discussed on page 305. And, in virtually
every contract, you’ll be asked to waive (meaning give up) your moral rights,
which you’ll have to do.
If you’re in a group, keep straight ahead.
If not a group, go to Chapter 22, “What’s in a Name?,” on page 375.
If you’re bored, take a nice walk around the block.

PART IV

Group Issues

21
Groups

If you’re a member of a group, everything in this book applies to you. But you
also get a whole set of treats that don’t concern individual artists. Let’s take a
look at them.

GROUP PROVISIONS IN RECORD DEALS
There’s a whole section in group record deals that isn’t in a solo artist’s contract.
It spells out what happens if the group breaks up, or if one individual (a prima
donna or the only rational member, depending on your side of the fence)
decides he or she no longer wants to play with the others.

Key Members
Most agreements will say that a breach of the record deal by one member of the
group is treated as a breach by all members of the group. In other words, if one
member refuses to record with the others, the whole group is in breach. This is
not such an unreasonable position if we’re talking about the lead singer or main
songwriter or key instrumentalist, but it’s not so hot if we’re talking about a
drummer who neither sings, writes, nor knows what state he lives in.
To handle our little drummer friend, we who represent artists gave birth to
the concept of a key member. Under this system, a few folks in the group are
listed in the contract as key members, and if a key member leaves the group or

otherwise breaches the agreement, the record company can treat that as a breach
by the whole group and exercise its various options (which we’ll discuss in a
minute). If anyone else screws up, it can’t.
This is something you have to ask for—no company uses a key member
concept in its form agreements. Also, as you might imagine, working this out
has been known to rankle bands—the people who aren’t named as key members
can get their noses out of joint. It also puts the lawyer/manager in the position
of dealing with who’s key and who isn’t, which can sometimes make non-key
members feel like their representatives are “playing favorites.”

The Company’s Rights to Leaving Members
What can the company do if a member (key or not) leaves the group?
1. All companies provide that, if a member leaves a group, the company has
the option to get his or her services as a solo artist (and as a member of
any other group). This is reasonable enough—without it, you could get
out of your record deal just by leaving the band.
Even when you have a key member concept in your deal, the
company will want the right to pick up all leaving members, key and
non-key alike. I like to argue that the company has no business (or
usually interest in) keeping the services of non-key members, such as our
drummer. (This is also how you sell the drummer on not being a key
member—if he decides to leave the group, he can split from the record
company and make his own deal, while a key member can’t. But if the
company insists on the right to pick him up as a soloist, even if he’s not a
key member, it scraps this argument.)
2. The company gets the option to keep the members who don’t leave the
group (assuming, of course, there’s not a total breakup).
3. The company has the option to terminate the members who didn’t leave,
since the group is no longer the one they signed. Note this means, if they
don’t exercise their option for the leaving member, that the deal is over.
So make sure that only a key member’s leaving can trigger this right.

4. Some contracts also deal with band reunions. They say that if 75% or
more of the band gets back together within ve years after the deal was
terminated for any one or more of the members, the company gets to
reinstate the deal for the band. This is to keep you from breaking up to
get out of the deal, then having a miraculous primal therapy session that
gets you back together the next week. From your point of view, keep the
period as short as possible.
By the way, if they’ve picked anyone up as a soloist before your
reunion, those solo deals stay in e ect even if they reinstate the overall
band deal.

Leaving Member Deals
The person leaving the group is cleverly called a leaving member. The terms of
a leaving member’s solo agreement are spelled out in the group’s deal and are
almost always less favorable than the deal for the group. The record company’s
position, which is understandable, is that the soloist is an unknown quantity,
whereas the group was the reason for making the deal. Success is by no means
assured—there are many cases of soloists who have left groups to fall at on their
faces (as well as those who have been more successful than the groups they came
from). If the group is important enough, the soloist’s royalty may be close to or
the same as the group’s, but the advance is almost always substantially less, and
the commitment is usually for one album at most (sometimes only demos). As
your bargaining power increases, so does your ability to negotiate these clauses,
particularly if a member of a group has been emerging as the star, or had an
earlier solo career.
As a practical matter, no matter how funky the leaving member provisions
are, the company is often willing to negotiate better terms when the breakup
happens.

TRIVIA QUIZ

Name the lead singers who have had solo careers after leaving the following
groups:
1. The Police
2. One Direction
3. Destiny’s Child
4. No Doubt
Name the groups from which the following soloists came:
1. Justin Timberlake
2. Neil Young (not Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young)
3. Eminem
4. Pharrell
(Answers on page 374.)

Deﬁcits
What happens to the group’s de cit (unrecouped balance) when a soloist sets
out on his or her own? Suppose a group breaks up and is $500,000
unrecouped. The company then picks up one member as a soloist, who streams
in the billions. Can the company take his or her solo royalties to recoup the
group’s $500,000 de cit? Conversely, if the group was recouped but the soloist
is a op, can the company use the group’s royalties to recoup the soloist’s
de cit?
Many companies, at least in their rst draft contract, take the right to do both
these things. If you ask, however, they will sometimes agree that only a pro-rata
share of the group’s de cit can be charged to the soloist, though this is harder for
key members. For example, if there are ve members of the group, only onefth of the de cit ($100,000 of the $500,000 in the above example) can be
carried over to a solo deal. Conversely, if you ask, they’ll also agree only to
charge the soloist’s pro-rata share of group royalties with the soloist’s de cit.
Companies will sometimes agree not to charge the soloist’s share of group

royalties with a de cit under the solo agreement, but this takes more bargaining
power.
You should provide that, if the group continues to record without the
soloist, no future group de cits can be charged to the soloist’s account or to the
soloist’s share of group royalties. It’s not uncommon for a successful group,
after a key member leaves, to record several dud records, which then eat up all
the old, successful record royalties. If these ops also eat up the ex-member’s
royalties on the successful records, he or she will be, shall we say, perturbed.
For example, suppose Harvey leaves the group after making four successful
albums. Because the group did well, it’s fully recouped, and Harvey retires to
that dream house in Elk’s End, expecting to live on his future royalties from
these four albums. The group, without Harvey, then goes into the studio and
runs up $1 million in costs trying to make the next Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts
Club Band, which streams three hundred times. If you don’t change the form,
the company will take Harvey’s royalties from the four successful albums and
use them to get back the $1 million it spent on the op. Harvey will not be in a
good mood.
Most companies will agree not to charge future costs against a person who
has left, because the leaving member doesn’t participate in the future records’
royalties and thus shouldn’t bear the costs. But you gotta ask.

INTERNAL GROUP DEALS
Why You Need an Internal Contract
Suppose there are two plumbers in Bugtussle, Kentucky. (There really is such a
place; Google it if you don’t believe me. And I’m pretty sure they have at least
two plumbers…) If these plumbers decide to go into business together, they
know enough to have a lawyer write them a partnership agreement. Or at least
go to LegalZoom.com and get a form. On the other hand, groups earning tens
of millions of dollars sometimes never get around to formalizing their
relationship. And, every once in a while, this neglect bites them in the ass.

The time to make an agreement among yourselves is now, when everybody is
all friendly and kissy-face. When you’re ghting with each other, particularly if
there’s a lot of money on the table, you may nd yourself killing the goose that
lays the golden eggs, as well as supporting the Retirement Fund for
Entertainment Lawyers.
One of my early experiences as a music lawyer was trying to solve the
problems of a major group who’d never formalized their relationship. One of
the two founding members got pumped up by a relative, who told him he was
the real star of the group (even though he didn’t sing or write). So he tried to
stop the other guy from using the group name. Because they were set up as a
corporation, with equal votes, they got so deadlocked that they couldn’t agree
to pay the phone bill. We had to go to court and ask the judge to appoint a
neutral third director to break the tie. The court chose a crusty ex-judge, who
wore a three-piece suit with a watch chain. He’d done this for many bitterly
ghting corporations and was supposed to be the tiebreaker that nally let the
corporation move forward. Well, His Honor lasted about three months, saying,
“I’ve never in my days seen anything this nasty.” He then disappeared into the
sunset, leaving behind a large bill.
The upshot was that the litigation lasted over nine years and cost the parties
more than today’s equivalent of ve million bucks in legal fees. The group was
killed early in the process, and the fellow who started the ght ended up broke.
All of which could have been avoided with a simple agreement and a few hours
of planning.
So pay attention and take care of it now. I know, nobody likes to talk about
negative stu (like breakups) when everything is working well. But, believe me,
when everything is going well is exactly the time to discuss it, because you can
do it in a friendly way. It’s like insurance—you may never need it, but you’ll
sure be glad you have it if you do. So nd a third party (like a lawyer) to blame
for raising the issue—that way, you don’t have to take the heat. (I routinely say
that I’m the jerk insisting on this, so you can be a good guy.) Or show everyone
this page and highlight this paragraph.

But enough fatherly advice. Here’s the things to deal with. (I’m referring to
folks as “partners” in this discussion, though there may be a di erent legal
structure, as we’ll see later.)

The Most Important Asset
Can you guess what your most important asset is?
Apart from your good looks, charm, and talent, your most important asset is
the group name. So, whatever else you do, by all means gure out what to do
with your group name if there’s a ght. In fact, if you only deal with your name
in a written agreement, I will be happy (but not ecstatic; to get me there, you
have to deal with everything).
You have to think through everything about the group name, such as what
happens if:
1. The lead singer and songwriter leave the group.
2. The bass player who doesn’t write music or sing leaves the group.
3. Three out of ve members leave to form another group.
4. The group breaks up and everybody goes back to Waxahachie.
Obviously, there are about ten thousand other possibilities, but all of them can
be covered with a few general rules. You can of course do anything you want,
but the most common solutions run along these lines:
1. No one can use the name if the group breaks up, regardless of how many
of you are still performing together (short of all of you, of course).
2. A majority of the group members performing together can use the
name. For example, if there are ve people in a group that breaks up, any
three of them together can use the name.
3. Only the lead singer, Sylvia, can use the name, regardless of who she’s
performing with.
4. Only George, the songwriter who founded the group and thought of the
name, can use it, regardless of who he’s performing with.

5. George and Sylvia can use the name as long as they perform together,
but if they don’t, no one can use it.
If one or two people really created the unique sound of the group, I’ve always
thought they should have the right to use the name. That’s because the others
alone wouldn’t truly represent the group to the public. On the other hand,
many groups operate on a “majority rule” principle, regardless of that spirit.
And we can both name successful groups who’ve replaced the lead singer over
time. So anything you can imagine is okay as long as everyone agrees and it has
some rational basis that a judge can understand. Just do something.
What happens if you don’t do anything? As you can gather from my
previous horror story, the law is not very helpful. In fact, there is very little law
on the subject (surprising as that sounds). That’s because most disputes are
settled privately, even though they may start as lawsuits and cost a lot of money
before settling. The cases that have gone the distance turn on the question of
whether the performing members are deceiving the public. The argument is
that one or more key people are the “essence” of the group, and anyone using
the name without them defrauds the public. And that gets decided by a judge
whose favorite singer is probably Tony Bennett.
If you think this sounds messy and expensive, you’re right. So solve it
yourself. Now!

Percentages
The next big thing to decide is everybody’s percentages. It may surprise you to
learn that there are many bands who, despite laughing, giggling, and slapping
high ves onstage, are in fact owned or controlled by one or two people, and
everybody else is merely a hired hand. Being a hired hand doesn’t necessarily
mean you’re on a salary—you can be a hired hand and get both a salary and a
percentage of the pro ts. It does, however, mean you serve at the will and
pleasure of the employer, which actually makes for a rather pleasant band
atmosphere—somehow the knowledge that they could be out on the street
tomorrow keeps people’s attitudes a lot healthier than if they think they have a

lifetime gig. (Hiring people usually isn’t practical for new artists, because you
don’t have the money to pay them much of a salary, if you have any money at
all. So most of the time with new bands, everyone works for a percentage of the
future pie.)
Assuming you’re all going to be partners, how should the pro ts be shared?
Again, there are no rules. You can do it any way that makes you happy. The
simplest way, of course, is to split things equally—if there are ve of you,
everyone gets one- fth, or 20%. This is common in new bands, but it can
become a source of irritation if some members work harder or contribute more
than others (such as handling all the media interviews while others sleep in).
Another approach I’ve seen (with a band that was built on a core of two people
who were together for a number of years before the others joined) gave the two
founders a bigger percentage than the others. And frankly, even when everyone
has been together from the beginning, there may be one or two key members
who deserve more than the others.
By the way, nothing says you have to use the same percentage for all areas.
Sometimes bands split evenly on concert monies (on the theory that everyone is
out there sweating together) but have di erent splits for records,
merchandising, television performances, etc.

Control
Just as ownership doesn’t have to be equal, neither does control of the band’s
decisions. Normally you vote in proportion to your percentage of pro ts, but
this isn’t carved in stone. So even if your percentages are equal, one or two key
members may control the vote—for example, they may have two votes where
everybody else has one. Or it can be set up so that the group can’t act without
one of the key members agreeing, regardless of how many people want to do it.
The possibilities are endless, but they need to be thought out carefully. For
example, try not to have an even number of votes, because this allows a
deadlock (meaning an equally divided vote where nothing can be done). If you
have an even number of votes, you could have a third party like your manager
break the tie, but it’s way better to do it inside the group.

Songwriting/Publishing
Another common issue is how to handle publishing. Does everyone
individually own the songs (or a share of the songs) that they create? Meaning
that every time you write a song, you agree on the percentage everyone
contributed, and each writer owns that percentage of the song? Or are all the
songs split evenly, maybe owned by a group entity, regardless of who wrote
them? I’ve certainly seen both, but the majority tend to have the creators own
their share of the songs individually. Over time, with big success, it can also
become a source of resentment if someone is getting substantial money from
songs they didn’t write.

Outside Activities
Can any of you do something outside the group? For example, can you have a
solo career, or a side project with another band? Or individually endorse a
product, like a drum set (if you’re a drummer; not much call for bass players to
endorse drums…)? And if so, do the earnings from that belong to the
individual, or does the band share in them?
Most of the time, unless someone joins the band who already has a solo
career, side projects require the band’s consent, and things get worked out case
by case. If there’s an agreement up front to allow outside projects, the
agreement will say that the band has to be the rst priority, meaning the
soloist can’t take on something that would interfere with the band’s schedule of
recording, touring, publicity, etc. That of course means rst priority for your
time (you can’t schedule an outside activity while you’re supposed to be on tour
with the band), but it also means there can’t be any other kind of interference
(for example, you couldn’t endorse Coke as a soloist if the band is sponsored by
Pepsi).

Other Issues
Here are the other major issues in a partnership agreement:

Firing. What kind of vote does it take to re a member? Majority?
Unanimous of everyone else? (Unanimous of everyone doesn’t work, since the
guy being red usually votes the other way.)
Hiring. What kind of vote is required to take in a new partner? Or to hire a
lawyer, agent, or manager? Majority? Unanimous? When my son Danny was
twelve, we came back from vacation to discover that his band had hired a
manager and keyboard player without even asking him. It ultimately broke up
the band. Yours could be next.
Quitting. Is everyone free to quit at will? Note this only concerns leaving the
other band members. You’re not free to quit under your record deal, and if
you’re in the middle of a tour, you’re not free to walk out on the concert
promoters without getting the teeth sued out of your mouth.
There’s no way to force someone to continue working with a group, but
you can penalize them if they don’t. For example, you can stop him or her from
working as a musical artist after quitting, require the member to pay his or her
solo earnings to the partnership (meaning the other group members get a piece),
and require him or her to pay for any damages caused by their leaving. On the
other hand, I’ve always been in favor of letting people go if they’re unhappy, as
long as they don’t walk out in the middle of a tour or otherwise leave some third
party hanging. Why force someone to stick around and make all your lives
miserable?
Incurring Expenses. What kind of vote do you need for the group to spend
money? It’s common to say that extraordinary expenses, like borrowing money
or spending over a certain dollar amount, take a bigger percentage vote than
day-to-day expenses.
Contributions. What kind of vote do you need to require partners to
contribute to the partnership (translation: put in money)? For example, if the
group needs dough to buy equipment, cover unexpected expenses, etc.?

Amendment of Partnership Agreement. What kind of vote does it take to
change the terms of the partnership deal? For example, can a majority vote
reduce your percentage? Or does it take your consent?
Death or Disability. What happens in the event of your death or disability?
Your partners don’t usually want your surviving spouse or parents voting on
partnership matters (not likely they’ll get onstage and sing). For this reason,
there’s normally a buyout (see the next section), and you’re treated as if you’d
quit the partnership or were terminated.
Ex-partners. If you quit or are terminated as a partner, do you keep your
same percentage level for past activities? (Almost always yes.) Do you get a
percentage of future activities? (Almost always no.) Do you get bought out of
your share of assets of the group, and if so, at what price and over what period of
time?

Buyouts
Here’s a buyout provision used by one of my clients for leaving partners:
Price. The price of the buyout equals the leaving partner’s percentage of all
“hard” assets owned by the partnership. “Hard” means things you can touch
(sound equipment, instruments, cash, etc.), as opposed to “intangibles” (such as
the group name, recording contracts, etc.). For example, if the hard assets are
worth $100,000, and the partner had a 25% interest, his or her share of the assets
would be worth $25,000. This is usually done on a “value” as opposed to “cost”
basis, because used equipment is generally worth less than the cost. It can also be
done on something called “book value,” which is an accounting concept
meaning the “value” on the books of the partnership. Book value is typically the
original cost minus some scheduled factor of depreciation that’s worked out by
your accountant. Of these three methods, book value is likely to be the lowest,
although it’s possible the real value could be less. Cost is the least accurate
measure of anything.

I speci cally provide that there is no value given to any intangible rights,
such as the group name, record deals, and merchandising deals. First, I think
intangibles are very di cult to value, if not impossible, and it’s expensive to hire
an appraiser to give an opinion. Second, and directly tied in, is the fact that the
value may be very di erent after someone leaves the group. For example, if the
lead singer/songwriter goes, the group name and record deal may be worthless.
Conversely, a new lead singer might join and make things a lot more successful
than they were before. Also, I think the leaving member’s contingent payout
(discussed in the “Contingent Payout” section below) compensates for the
intangibles—in essence, that’s a form of valuing them.
You should know that not everyone agrees with this approach to intangibles.
There are certainly situations where a name is worth a lot of money after the
group has broken up. For example, the Beatles, the Doors, and Led Zeppelin
still generate tons of dough from the use of their names in merchandising, and
it’s not illogical to give an ex-member some reduced piece of materials created
after the member has left. (Note, if the band breaks up, everyone continues to
own their shares of the name.) Despite all that, and despite the fact that it could
arguably create an unfair result, I still like my way. You can’t know in advance
what a particular member will really contribute to the value of the name, or
how much value will be added or lost after that member leaves. And guring it
out after the fact makes lawyers rich. So in the client deal we’re using as an
example, we say there is no value given to the intangibles.
Cash Payout. In the partnership deal for this band, the value of hard assets is
paid out over a period of two years, at the rate of 25% each six months. Thus, in
our $25,000 example, $6,250 would be paid six months after termination,
$6,250 paid twelve months after, and so forth. Because the total isn’t paid up
front, the leaving partner often gets interest on the unpaid balance.
The reason for structuring a payout over time is to protect the remaining
members from having to come up with a big chunk of cash (which they may
not have). Also, it’s not uncommon to provide that the terminated partner can
look only to the assets of the partnership for his or her buyout payments. That

means the other individual partners aren’t personally responsible if the
partnership tanks and has no money to pay.
Contingent Payout. The leaving member gets their continuing percentage
from activities of the partnership in which they participated. This means
royalties from records they played on, monies from merchandise using their
name or likeness, concerts and TV shows in which they performed, etc.
(Remember, there are special record contract provisions about leaving
members, which may a ect their continuing royalties. See page 362.) In this
deal, the leaving members don’t get any portion of group earnings from
performances and other activities that happen after they leave.

Legal Ethics
You should be aware of a common ethical problem that groups have. As we
discussed on page 59, a lawyer who represents a group and draws up a
partnership agreement has a built-in con ict of interest. A con ict of interest,
called in shorthand a con ict, means the lawyer represents two or more clients
whose interests are adverse to each other. So if a lawyer represents the
partnership, he or she can’t take sides and represent any one of you against any
other of you. However, this is exactly what making a partnership agreement
requires, because the various members’ best interests aren’t the same. For
example, extra chunks of money going to the lead singer have to come from the
others, whose best interests are to keep them. Same with voting percentages. (A
manager, business manager, or agent who counsels you about group matters
also has the same con ict, though lawyers are subject to strict ethical codes that
don’t apply to others.)
This situation, of course, happens every day, so those of us in the industry are
used to dealing with it. And all ethical lawyers will advise you of its existence.
You can do one of two things:
1. Each member can get independent counsel (which may or may not be
a ordable) to negotiate the agreement among yourselves. This also takes

a long time and can be destructive if anyone decides to be a hero.
However, it’s the best way to do it.
2. Far more commonly, the lawyer explains all the issues to you openly, and
then lets you decide among yourselves how you want to resolve them. In
this case, the lawyer doesn’t represent any of you, but rather just acts as a
“secretary,” writing down whatever agreement you reach on your own.
If you use this route, your lawyer will ask you to sign a con ict waiver,
which says he or she has explained the con ict to you, and you’re going
ahead anyway.

LLC, Corporation, or Partnership?
Once you’ve decided all these issues, how do you set yourself up? The choices
are an LLC, a partnership, or a corporation, and the major di erences (as we
discussed on page 196) are the tax-planning aspects, the liability limitations, and
the fact that corporations are more expensive to set up and run. By liability
limitations, I mean that corporations limit the assets that can be grabbed by
someone suing you. In a corporation, if you handle things properly, they can
only get the assets of the entity. With a partnership, however, they can grab both
the partnership’s assets and the personal assets of every partner (that means you).
While this is a nice bene t of a corporation, it’s o set by the increased cost of
setting up and running the sucker, so it’s marginal in your early stages. Also, as
discussed before, a corporation doesn’t protect you from record company
liability (because of the inducement letter we discussed on page 197), nor does
it protect you from copyright infringement liability (as we discussed on page
195).
A limited liability company, or LLC, is basically a partnership, but it
provides the limited liability of a corporation (though it has the same exceptions
to liability we just discussed for corporations, meaning it doesn’t shield you
from claims by your record company or copyright infringement claims).
Because an LLC is as cheap and easy to use as a partnership, it’s the vehicle du
jour for many groups.

To sum up, if you don’t have a written agreement, most states have laws that
spell out what happens—generally everybody owns everything equally and has
an equal vote—which may not be what you want. And the rules about using
the group name after breakup are very fact-speci c, meaning there’s a lot of
room to ght. So I highly recommend that you do your own agreement. You
can see there are complicated issues around groups, and you’ll be way better o
resolving them yourself rather than leaving it to the ding-a-lings in your state
capitol. Or that judge who’d rather be listening to Tony Bennett.

Answers to quiz on page 363:
Groups:
1. The Police—Sting
2. One Direction—Harry Styles
3. Destiny’s Child—Beyoncé
4. No Doubt—Gwen Stefani
Soloists:
1. Justin Timberlake—NSYNC
2. Neil Young—Bu alo Spring eld
3. Eminem—D 12
4. Pharrell—N.E.R.D

22
What’s in a Name?

RIGHTS IN A NAME
A number of years back, a band named Green Jellö changed its name to Green
Jelly to avoid a dispute with the owners of the Jell-O trademark. While the
group ultimately got some good publicity from all the ap, having a name that
steps on somebody else’s toes can be a serious problem.
The most common problems don’t come from naming your band after
snack foods, but rather from another group that used the name before you did.
And this is equally important if you’re an individual, especially if you’re not
using your real name. Or sometimes even if you are using your birth name
(No, I’m not that Paul McCartney…)
So when it comes to your name, there are two legal things to deal with:
1. Before you start, make sure nobody is already using your name; and
2. Once you’re clear, take some steps to keep other people from ripping it
o .

Check It Out
You should gure out if someone else is using your name as soon as possible,
ideally before you use it. If you use someone else’s name just on Facebook,
SoundCloud, Bandcamp, TikTok, or some similar site, you might get a snippy
letter, but you can usually work it out (see page 378 for how things get worked

out). Things get way more serious when you release music or start touring over
a wide geographic area. And changing a name once you’ve built up a following
is not a happy event.
If you’re about to sign a record deal and someone can stop your label from
putting out your music, it could cost the label a lot of money. And if it does, the
record company will turn to you with a handful of “gimme”—every record deal
makes you guarantee that they can use your name without any legal hassles,
which means you have to pay for the mess if there is one.
After being stung by a few of these situations, most record companies now
check the names of new artists before they release music. Their goal is to
determine (a) if someone is currently using the name, and whether they started
using it before you did, or (b) whether someone used it a while ago and still has
some recordings available or is planning a reunion. Unfortunately, there’s no
way to ever be 100% sure, but here’s what the record companies do, and you
can also check these sources on your own:
1. The Internet is a great way to do your preliminary searches.
a. Try looking up your name on a search engine, like Google or Bing,
to see what comes up. Also try social networking sites, like
Facebook, SoundCloud, Twitter, Bandcamp, Instagram, or
Last.FM. Look for YouTube and TikTok videos and also check the
music streaming services like Spotify, Apple Music, and Amazon.
Check music-oriented websites, like Discogs.com, Billboard.com
and AllMusic.com. However, all this is just a starting point:
Finding your name doesn’t mean the other band or person is still
around using the name (bands break up regularly, in case you
didn’t notice, and artists retire to paint landscapes in Toolyville).
Just as important, not nding your name doesn’t mean it’s clear.
b. Look for your name at www.whois.com, which is a registry for
domain names. Also, start entering some website addresses in your
browser, and use variations, like yourname.com or
yournameband.com or yournamemusic.com, and so forth. This
could not only lead you to another band with your name, but also

let you know whether you can get a domain name registration for
your website.
c. It’s a good idea to lock up your domain names (and your social
media usernames) before you become popular. If you don’t, the
pirates will swoop down as soon as your name means something.
More about this on page 384.
d. Think about nicknames and acronyms connected to your name.
The more you have a unique combination of words (for example,
Twenty One Pilots), the less likely you’ll run into someone else
with the same combination. Also, some of these names end up
being shortened into a nickname or acronym or morphing into
something else, either by you or the fans. Like Taylor Swift being
known as “Tay,” or Beyoncé as “Queen B.” It’s impossible to know
what folks might do to your name, but at least give it a think, and if
its prone to a shortening, do a search of the acronym or possible
nickname, too. And even consider protecting it (we’ll discuss how
to protect your name in a minute), though this may be too
expensive in early stages.
2. The U.S. Patent and Trademark O ce has a website where you can
search federal trademark applications and registrations. Go to
http://www.uspto.gov/trademarks-application-process/searchtrademark-database. Searching there can get awkward (what government
procedures aren’t?), but this can be a good jumping-o point.
3. California and many other states have a website that lets you check
public records for corporations and limited liability companies that
might have names similar to yours (in California, it’s
http://kepler.sos.ca.gov). Because so many groups hang out in
California, it’s not a bad idea to take a quick look there even if you’re in
another state (a geographic state or a state of consciousness).
4. The U.S. Copyright O ce also has a searchable catalog for copyright
registrations from 1978 to the present. This can be another way to nd
names of groups. Go to the following link: http://cocatalog.loc.gov/cgibin/Pwebrecon.cgi?DB=local&PAGE=First. When you get there, search

under “Title.” However, if your name is a common word, this could be
a waste of time because you’ll come up with a lot of irrelevant
information.
5. If the record companies don’t nd anything in the above sources, they
order a comprehensive trademark/service mark search to look for
registrations, as well as other listings of the name and anything similar. It
currently costs about $400 for a preliminary search, and about another
$1,500 to $2,500 for an in-depth one, which is cheap insurance in the
long run.
These comprehensive searches are conducted by independent search
companies and by lawyers who specialize in trademarks. (If you use an
independent search rm, it’s a good idea to have the report reviewed by a
trademark attorney who can advise you whether anything you found
might be a problem.) Here are a few searchers:
CompuMark (Clarivate) www.compumark.com. You can email them at
@compumark.us@clarivate.com, or crank call them at (855) 2585858. Dial “1” 5 times to get a human.
Corporation
Service
Company
(800)
927-9800,
www.cscglobal.com/global/web/csc/trademark-search.html.
CT Corsearch (800) 732-7241, www.corsearch.com.
Fross, Zelnick, Lehrman & Zissu (a law rm with a lot of music
experience) (212) 813-5900, email: info@fzlz.com.
There’s an even more extensive (and expensive, of course) search known as a
U.S. Full Entertainment Search, which is o ered by CompuMark, whose info is
listed above. That’s an excellent search if the bucks are available. (By the way,
whichever search your label uses, it’s recoupable from your royalties. Are you
shocked?) As noted above, searches can never be 100% foolproof (for example,
there may be a local band that hasn’t registered a service mark but has been
performing under your name for years). But it’s the best you can do. And if
you’re going to market your music in a serious way, I’d highly recommend
having a professional handle the search and analysis of the results.

IMPORTANT NOTE: When your record company does a search, they’re
doing it to protect themselves, not you. Also, their goal is to sell music, so their
search will focus on recordings and music group names. But if you plan to use
your name in another product category—like T-shirts, headphones, perfumes,
NFTs, hamster earmu s—they’re not likely to search those areas. The record
company might consider it safe to use your name for their purposes, but not all
the uses you may want. And if they screw up the search and something goes
wrong, it’s your rear end that’s on the line. So when you can a ord it, do your
own full search and have it reviewed by trademark counsel.
If your search turns up a group or person using your name, or using a name
that’s similar to yours, you have to deal with it. (If you nd a name that’s
similar, you’ll need a legal opinion as to whether or not it’s too close—the test is
whether the public is likely to confuse the two of you.) Most of the time you
can contact the other group and work out a deal. If you nd them and discover
that they broke up or abandoned the name, they may have lost their rights and
you don’t need to worry about them. But you de nitely need a legal opinion
on this. Also, some of these groups never give up dreaming, so even if the band
name looks dead, if it’s the same as yours, it pays to still look into it more deeply.
They might be on the eve of a reunion.
If they’re still using the name, and if they’re willing to change it, they’ll want
to get paid. The most common deal is the payment of a lump sum in exchange
for their drifting into the sunset (usually in the range of a few thousand dollars
to maybe $20,000 or so, though it can get into six gures if they smell blood).
But whatever you do, be sure you buy out all rights. Sometimes the other artist
wants to license the name to you and keep ownership of the mark. Don’t do
this. For one thing, you’ll be building up goodwill for a name you don’t own,
and in addition, you’ll have to live with this license for your entire career.
Which means they’re always hovering around your professional life.
If you do make a deal, you’ll need a knowledgeable lawyer to draw it up
because this is a very tricky area. Never try to handle this kind of deal by
yourself.
By the way, making a deal doesn’t assure you of total peace. For example,
you might buy out the New York dude, only to later nd some other guy was

using the name in Seattle, and that he started before the one in New York. Or
there might be a girl in Düsseldorf who was using it before any of them. In that
case, you’re back to square one (actually, square eins in Düsseldorf), minus
several thousand bucks.
Occasionally, the other folks in this situation think they’ve got you by the
squeezable parts, and they hold out for enormous sums of money. When you
get one of these, or if you come across someone who simply won’t sell the
name, you have to change yours. Sometimes you can keep part of the name by
adding something to it, but you need to add something distinctive that clearly
separates you from the others using the name. For example, if you were using
the name Silver and found that it was taken, you might call yourself Denver
Silver. (I always think of that great scene in the movie Spinal Tap where they
talk about having been called the Originals, only to nd another group had that
name, so they called themselves the New Originals.) But this procedure is tricky,
and you’ll need legal help.

Protecting Your Name
Okay, you checked things out and you look clear for takeo . How do you make
sure some yo-yo can’t grab your name as you race down the road to stardom?
The way to protect yourself is by getting a service mark, which is similar to a
trademark—a trademark is a name used for goods (like Heinz ketchup, Kleenex
tissues, etc.) and a service mark is a name used for services (like Delta Air Lines,
Tommy’s Dry Cleaners, Chloe’s Colon Cleansing, etc.). A lot of folks just use
the term “trademark” for both, including me later in the chapter.
In the United States, you get rights in a mark by actually using the name. To
get federal protection, you have to use your name in interstate commerce
(meaning commerce between two states). That’s simple to do these days: just
put your music and other materials on the Internet.
In addition to using your name in interstate commerce, you also need to
have the name associated with you in the mind of the public. The legal name for
this association is goodwill, meaning people feel good vibes when they hear the
name because it makes them think of you (“goodwill” is what people in 1900

called “good vibes”). In other words, if your name makes the public scratch its
head or think of their Aunt Fanny, you don’t have much. But if your name
makes them think of your gigs, your recordings, your merch, or whatever other
weird stu you do, then your name has turned into a trademark with
goodwill. And when that happens, it’s yours and no one else’s.
Congratulations!
Once you’ve established a trademark with goodwill, you can even stop
names that are di erent from yours but similar enough to confuse the public.
That’s because the public might think it’s you or a spin-o group. There’s a
famous case from the 1920s where Charlie Chaplin stopped someone from
using the name “Charles Aplin,” and there’s an even more fun case where the
Dallas Cowboy Cheerleaders stopped the porno lm Debbie Does Dallas from
calling its star an “X Dallas Cheerleader.” (For you research freaks, the case cites
are Chaplin v. Amador, 93 Cal. App. 358 [1928]; and Dallas Cowboy
Cheerleaders, Inc., v. Pussycat Cinema, Ltd., 604 F.2d 200 [2d Cir. 1979].)
So as noted, in the United States (though not everywhere, as we’ll discuss
shortly), your rights come from using the name, not from registering it. (There’s
one exception to the requirement that you actually use a name, called an Intent
to Use, but hang on; we’ll get to that on page 382, and we’ll get into
registration in the next section).
Another important area in trademark is something called dilution.
Historically, you only got trademark protection in the speci c area where you
did business. In other words, if you were a phone company named Presto, you
probably couldn’t stop a massage parlor from using that name, since people
wouldn’t think their massages were coming from your phone repairmen.
Nowadays, there’s a law that says using a famous name in another area dilutes
the value of the original trademark, and it may be possible to stop the massage
parlor. So, for example, even though the Beatles don’t have a record label under
that name, you couldn’t get away with a company called Beatles Records.

REGISTRATION

At some point in your career you want to le a registration of your
trademark/service mark (as a reminder, trademarks protect your name on
products, and service marks are for your services). Registration tells the world
that you’re using a particular name and that the name has goodwill attached to
it (or more accurately, it tells everyone in the United States; foreign protection
is a di erent story, as we’ll discuss on page 383). Registration also establishes a
date on which you were using the name, and creates a legal presumption that
you own it nationwide, even if you’re only performing in Turkey Scratch,
Arkansas. A legal presumption means that the other user has the burden of
proving you don’t own it; without the presumption, you have to prove you do
own it. Also, in addition to this basket of legal goodies, a registration makes sure
that your name shows up in any search that somebody else does (see point 5 on
page 377). Plus you get to use the symbol ® with your name on the items
you’ve registered for, which is ultra-cool, don’t ya think?
You can get federal applications from the incredibly sexy website of the U.S.
Patent and Trademark O ce, at www.uspto.gov. You can also call them at
(800) 786-9199, or email them at TrademarkAssistanceCenter@uspto.gov.
While I hate to tell you this, you can le an application online. I really don’t
recommend it; this area is very tricky and technical; it’s not like getting a
domain name, which is pretty simple. I strongly suggest that anything having to
do with these rights be run through a trademark lawyer—even with my
experience in music law, I wouldn’t do it myself.
In case you didn’t think all that was complicated enough, here’s some more
fun. Unlike copyrights, in the trademark world you have to register your name
for the speci c goods and services you plan to use. There are forty- ve (Count
’em! Forty- ve!) di erent categories, called International Classes, that cover all
activities in the known world. And there are separate fees for registering each
one. Awesome…
Thankfully most of these classes are irrelevant to musicians, such as oor
coverings, lubricant and fuel products, ber products, ropes and cordage
(unless you’re into bondage). Here’s a link to a government site where you can
read about a lot of them: https://idm-tmng.uspto.gov/id-master-listpublic.html. But this isn’t a full list, and what’s there isn’t exactly what I’d call

“straightforward.” Yet another reason why using a trademark lawyer is a good
thing.
The ones most relevant to music are:
1. Class 41, “Education and Entertainment Services,” which covers live
performances and most online activities, such as “providing online
music, not downloadable” (i.e., streaming music).
2. Class 9, “Electrical and Scienti c Apparatus” which doesn’t sound all
that relevant if you’re not Thomas Edison, but it covers “downloadable
musical sound recordings” and “musical sound recordings,” which are
CDs, vinyl, and audiotape (yes, it still says audiotape). By the way, they’ll
want proof of your name being on more than one recording before you
can register.
3. When you go into merchandise, you’ll need Class 25 (Clothing and
Apparel). If you get more specialized, such as jewelry and things like
that, there are other classes you might also need.
Starting to see what I mean by not exactly “straightforward”?
By the way, a particularly tricky area of registration is CBD and marijuana
product lines, which some artists are now doing. Although there are a few
exceptions, the Feds go whacko when they see these words in a federal
trademark application. (In case you forgot, marijuana is still illegal on the
federal level.) If you’re going into this area, and you’re not too stoned, get
yourself a really knowledgeable team before the trip to Weed-Ville.
Now that you have a Class education (sorry for the pun, but obviously not
sorry enough to delete it), I can say that you’ll likely just need Class 41 in the
beginning. You can expand beyond it as your fame grows.
If you’re a group, or if you’re thinking of having a company hold your
service mark (rather than you holding it personally), it’s really important to get
that nailed down before you le an application. The application has to be in the
name of the owner of the mark (meaning the one who controls the use of it),
and if you use the wrong applicant, your application is worth less than a broken

guitar pick. So if there’s any disagreement over ownership, get it sorted out
before you le.
Do You Have a Reservation? There is one major exception to the
requirement that you use a mark to get rights to it. You can register an Intent
to Use before you actually use a name, if you have a genuine intent to use the
name in the not-too-distant future. If you’re the rst one to le an Intent to
Use, then even if someone else uses the name before you do (but after you le),
you can stop them after your registration is issued.
You can turn the Intent to Use into a real, live registration application by
ling evidence that you’ve actually started using the name on the goods or
services you led for. The evidence only needs to be something that shows
you’ve used your name in interstate commerce, such as making your music
available on the Internet.
If you don’t le this evidence within three years after the government okays
your Intent To Use application, then your application is declared invalid, turns
into a frog, and you have to start all over.
After ling your application, it can take a year or more to get the
registration. And that’s if everything goes smoothly (your tax dollars at work).
Here’s what happens:
First, the guys in the federal Patent and Trademark O ce check around to
see if someone already has a registered mark that’s too close to yours. If the PTO
thinks another mark is too similar, your application gets bounced, and you can
start squabbling with the Patent and Trademark folks. They may also hassle you
if your mark is just a name, like Smith, or descriptive, like Good Music.
Once you get past these guys, the U.S. Patent and Trademark O ce
publishes your name in the U.S. Oﬃcial Gazette (so if you haven’t made it
anywhere else, at least you can happen there). This is so that anybody who reads
the Gazette (don’t you and all your friends?) can object to registering your
name because it’s too close to theirs.
Once you’re registered, you have to continue using the name in order to
keep up your rights. In fact, there’s a legal presumption that you’ve abandoned
the name if you haven’t used it for three years. (Presumption means that you

have to prove you didn’t abandon it, as opposed to the other guy having to
prove you did.) However, if you use a name continuously for ve years after
your registration is issued, you can le something called an A davit of
Incontestability, which is fancy talk for saying that no one can ever come
along and claim they had the name before you did (actually, they can still give
you a hard time, but it’s really tough for them).
Foreign Registration. Many countries of the world have a registration
system similar to the United States’, but I doubt you could tolerate a discussion
of di erent territories’ intricacies (and in fact, I don’t really know them because
I fell asleep during the lecture). Foreign registrations are only meaningful when
you’re having success on an international scale, but at that point you should
start registering in other countries. At a minimum, you should register in major
territories such as UK, Australia, Canada, Japan, and get something called an
EUTM registration, which is a single registration that covers all twenty-seven
countries of the European Union.
Unlike the United States, many territories (notably the EU and Japan) have a
rst to le rule, which means that if someone who’s never used the name les
ahead of you in a particular territory, they can stop you from performing there.
Since only a moron would rip o the name of a dud group, this isn’t usually
important until you’re having some success. But when you are, start registering
pretty quickly. Filing outside the United States is expensive, so focus on places
where you’ll be making the most dough (or whatever “dough” is called in
Turkistan).
There are some international treaties (meaning deals between countries) that
help you control or defer your costs to get international protection, including
something called an International Registration. I would not use “simple” to
describe this process, and if you make one tiny mistake, they will chuckle as they
send you back to square one in all those countries. So get a trademark lawyer to
help you because it’s a big cost saver when done right.
Domain Name Registration. As noted earlier, once you’re committed to a
trademark, it’s a good idea to check if anyone else owns that domain name (see

the discussion of using www.whois.com on page 376). Be sure to check “.net”
and “.org” as well as “.com,” not to mention things like “.biz” and “.plumbing”
(maybe not the last one). If the name is clear, it’s usually worth the money to
register it as a domain name, so you can set up a website at some point in your
career. You may also want to register on the major social media sites (TikTok,
YouTube, Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, SoundCloud, etc.).
All these “dot whatevers” (.com, .net, .biz, etc.) are called top-level domains
(TLDs). (The full name of each website (like www.yourname.xxx) is called a
URL [meaning Universal Resource Locator]). There are now so many TLDs
that it’s cost-prohibitive to buy up your name in every one of them (Google
“TLD list” if you want to see them. Some interesting stu in there, like .boo,
.monster, .rehab, .porn, and so forth). Because the choice of TLDs is endless,
the best you can do is grab the ones you think are most important to what
you’re doing, and when you’re really famous, steel yourself against the
inevitable pirates who will grab some of the others. Most artists let the pirates do
their thing as long as it doesn’t create confusion with their fans (meaning the
pirate site doesn’t look like it comes from the artist). If the pirates go over the
line, you can look into stopping them, but that’s not cheap.
In any event, owning a URL is nothing like a federal trademark registration,
and doesn’t give you any trademark rights. It’s more like a telephone number—
useful to have, but without the other protections, not much more than a
locator.
Logos. Some artists come up with a distinctive logo. That gives you another
level of identi cation with your fans, even beyond your name (for example, the
Rolling Stones’ lips with the tongue sticking out). If you want to use a logo, all
the rules about searching and registering your name as a trademark also apply to
registering your logo. And you have to register the logo separately from the
name (meaning more expense).
In addition, the artwork in your logo (if it’s original enough) is protected
under the copyright laws, which means you want to get a copyright registration
for it as well.

If you didn’t do the logo artwork yourself, then the artist who created it
would own the copyright. You can argue it’s a work for hire (see page 319 for
what that means), but as we discussed earlier, that’s very di cult without a
written agreement. So always get the artist to sign a written transfer of the
copyright to you. And do this even if your best friend created your logo—
friendships have a way of fraying when there’s a lot of money involved. I
strongly recommend you get a lawyer to help you with this one, because it’s a
tricky area. As we discussed earlier, if it’s not a work for hire, the artist who sold
you a logo could get back the U.S. rights in thirty- ve years and hold up what
might be your now-iconic logo. So in case you haven’t noticed the recurring
theme in this chapter, get a knowledgeable lawyer.
By the way, if you take an image for your logo from a website that rents or
sells images (called stock images), be sure to read their terms and conditions
carefully. Most stock images are for limited uses in ads or artwork, and they
speci cally prohibit using the images as a logo. Even some big companies get
into trouble over this. However, there are online logo vendors that run contests
for logo creation, where you can get all the rights you need. But you still have to
read carefully to be certain you’re getting everything. And even when you do,
you have to make sure that your logo doesn’t infringe somebody else’s.
So, to recap: Trademarks are a very complicated legal area, requiring careful
analysis of your speci c facts. If you have any problems with your name, no
matter how small you think they are, you MUST get a lawyer. Do not ignore
the problem—it will only lie there sleeping until you’re successful, at which
point it will wake up and chomp a large gash out of your rear end.

PART V

Touring

23
Personal Appearances—Touring

Now let’s see what happens when you hit the road, to get up close and personal
with your fans.

ROLES OF TEAM MEMBERS
Here’s what your team does when you tour:

Personal Manager
Your personal manager is the chief executive o cer of your touring life. He or
she ensures that your agent is bringing you the best touring options (read
“hounding the agent on a regular basis”); helps you decide which tour is right
for your career; works with the agent to make the best possible deals for you;
and mechanically makes the tour happen. More speci cally, he or she
coordinates and supervises:
1. Booking the tour (in conjunction with your agent) by making deals with
the promoters (the people who hire you, rent the hall, advertise the
event, etc.; see page 395 for more about promoters).
2. Overseeing rehearsals, hiring band members, watching the nances with
your business manager.
3. Hiring the crew and making sure they do their jobs.

4. Transporting people and equipment, booking ights, hotels, trucks,
buses, etc.
5. Collecting money on the road.
6. Coordinating advertising, marketing, and radio and Internet
promotions, both in advance and while you’re in each city.
7. Handling day-of-show activities, such as interviews, meet-and-greets, etc.
8. Putting out whatever res crop up (such as missing equipment,
improper advertising, dates that aren’t selling well, lapses in security,
etc.).
9. Dealing with illness, cancellations, or other assorted disasters. This is a
really tough part of the job, because the manager and agent have to
reschedule the dates and sometimes refund money to fans. And by the
way, no one gets paid for any of this, since you’re losing money.
With bigger artists, a lot of these jobs are delegated to a tour manager and/or
tour accountant. But the personal manager is ultimately responsible, and the
buck stops with him or her.

Agent
The agent, in conjunction with your manager, books the tour. He or she makes
the deals with the promoters (which includes picking promoters that will
produce the show professionally and not disappear with your money). At the
early stages of your career, they’ll be pounding promoters to book you. At the
later stages, they’ll be pounded by promoters to book you.
Agents also put together packages, meaning shows with two or more artists
playing together. When done right, this grows your audience. And even if
you’re established, it can expose you to di erent audiences who wouldn’t have
come if you weren’t touring with that troupe of dancing donkeys.
In addition, agents, along with your manager, help with the promoter’s
marketing of the tour. Over the last number of years, tickets have been going on
sale earlier and earlier, sometimes as much as a year ahead of the concert date.
And because people know they can buy a ticket later from a ticket broker,

there’s generally not the rush of sellout that used to happen in the past. So
marketing the tour, and sustaining it over the period while tickets are on sale, is
critical. And because the agents handle so many tours, they have a lot of
experience in this area. For example, they might get your promoter’s marketing
plan and compare it to marketing plans of other artists they represent. In other
words, the agents have so much knowledge that the promoters can’t jive them
by skimping on the marketing plan.
You’re agent and personal manager also help you with the following
decisions about your tour:
Itinerary. Your itinerary is (a) your tour routing (which cities and in what
order) and (b) which venues you play in each city. If you’re the opening act for
a major tour, setting the itinerary means you show up when you’re told. If
you’re headlining, the itinerary is critical. Proper routing can save or lose you a
bundle of money. While it may seem obvious, the tour has to be planned so you
don’t end up going from New York to Oregon to Florida in a four-day period.
However, concert venues are not available at all times (not just because they’re
booked by other artists, but because they have basketball games, hockey games,
tractor pulls, etc.), and the juggling act of matching routing with availability is a
truly artistic maneuver.
Image. How does the tour work with your image? This is twofold:
1. If you’re an opening act, is the headliner compatible with your
audience? If you’re a heavy metal band, for example, you probably
shouldn’t open for the Osmond Family Reunion tour.
2. What venues are you playing? It says one thing if you play a brand-new
5,000-seat amphitheater in a high-end neighborhood, and it says
something else if you play an older, 3,500-capacity hall with no seats, on
the funkier side of town. In other words, you want to be in a venue
consistent with your image, and in the right part of the city for your
fans.

When to Put the Tickets on Sale. Simple answer: when you’re hot. If
you’ve got a lot going on, you want your tickets out there, even if the dates are
far away.
Pricing of Tickets. Although your rst reaction may be to “grab all the gusto
you can” by charging the highest ticket prices the market will bear, this decision
isn’t so black-and-white. Many managers and agents are squarely within this
camp, and their thinking is persuasive: Nobody knows how long things will last,
make hay while the sun shines, get ’em while you’re hot, etc. On the other hand,
many respected managers and agents take a di erent view, feeling that a lowerpriced ticket draws more people (particularly younger people, who can’t a ord
expensive tickets), creates a bigger buzz, and in the long run is a better careerbuilding move. Also, even when they’re very successful, some bands keep a low
ticket price as a way to say that they’re putting their fans ahead of their business.
(Keep in mind, when you’re setting prices, that ticketing charges [like the
ticketing service, taxes, and venue fees] get slapped on top, and these can be
substantial.)
This pricing debate is also related to where you are in your career—if you’re
an established artist, you needn’t worry as much about building for the long
term.
Most popular artists straddle the pricing issue at the same event: They scale
their tickets (scale is an industry term for setting ticket prices) to charge more for
up-front seats, and less for the back of the house, so that all their fans can a ord
to come.
Speaking of secondhand tickets, sites like StubHub, SeatGeek, Vivid Seats,
ScoreBig, eBay, Craigslist, Razorgator, and TicketsNow have become
important sources for tickets. This is known as the secondary market, meaning
a place where tickets are resold after their rst sale.
Over the last few years, some artists have taken a number of their tickets and
put them through a secondary player like StubHub or a platinum ticketing
service run by the promoter for the initial sale (as opposed to the second sale
after someone already bought the tickets). The theory is that the true value of
prime tickets isn’t the face value, but rather what someone is willing to pay in

the secondary market. This practice is known as competitive pricing or
dynamic ticketing, which is similar to airlines, where computer algorithms set
prices based on demand. Why shouldn’t the artist have those monies, rather
than some yahoo who takes no risk in producing the show, going on the road,
etc.?
Pre-sales. The ticket scalpers have developed sophisticated bots (automated
computer programs) that rush in to buy tickets ahead of everyone else. They
also jam the system so that real fans get frustrated and give up before they get
their tickets (which then drives them to the secondary market, where tickets
harvested by the bots are for sale). In response to this, some artists use a veri ed
fan program, to assure that real fans get access to the seats. The basic idea of
these programs is that if you show that you’re a real fan, you get a code that puts
you ahead in line to buy tickets. The speci cs vary, but for example you might
need to show that you’re a fan club member, or that you bought merchandise,
or watched music videos, or posted on social media, etc. This idea of getting
tickets to fans ahead of the public sale is called pre-sale.
Another pre-sale practice is for credit card companies (like American Express
and Citi cards) to o er a certain number of tickets to their cardholders in
advance of the public sale. This seems to work best with heritage artists, whose
fans are older (and have credit cards). In exchange for access to the tickets, the
credit card company puts up money for advertising, and sometimes pays a
“bounty” for each ticket they sell (meaning money on top of the ticket price).
Pre-sales are also done through fan clubs if you have one (see page 436), and
if you’re doing this, the number of tickets you sell through your fan club is built
into the promoter deal. There are also pre-sales by the venue itself, by local
organizations who use them as fundraisers or perks, and by gas stations (just
kidding about the last one).
With very hot tickets, it’s a management decision about how many tickets
should go through a pre-sale program. Some managers think it should be
minimal, so that the public has a shot at the bulk of tickets, but others think it’s
okay to pre-sell the entire venue on the theory that a “sellout is a sellout.” On
the conservative side you might see 20% of the venue allocated for “pre-sale,”
leaving the rest open to the public. On the aggressive side, you might see 90% of

the venue sold in “pre-sale,” meaning the remaining 10% will sell out to the
public in minutes. Feel free to chime in on the debate.
Deposits. Agents are also responsible for collecting deposits, which are
monies paid by the promoters prior to your show. In order to hold you for a
particular date, the promoters historically paid 50% of your fee about thirty days
ahead of the performance. It’s a way of ensuring that you don’t get sti ed (at
least completely). For example, if your deal is $10,000 for a show, the promoter
would pay $5,000 in advance. As we’ll discuss in the promoter deal section on
page 395, there are two mega-promoters these days (Live Nation and AEG)
who buy a lot of the big tours. Because they’re solid nancially (and because
they’re big gorillas), they want to pay a much smaller deposit (10% or so), and
they only want to pay it three to ve days before the date. Other promoters,
with a track record and solid history, such as casinos for example, still pay 50%
or so when the dates are con rmed, or at least before the tickets go on sale.
If you’re dealing with a new promoter, or a new festival, the agent may want
a personal guarantee by the owners of the promoter—new promotion
companies have a way of going bankrupt if the event doesn’t go well, and the
artist (and agent and manager) get sti ed. With these newbies, the deposit is
often more than 50%, and I’ve even seen deposits of 100%. This is also true for
international dates in shady places, and for private shows (meaning shows that
aren’t open to the public, such as a corporate event for employees only, or some
rich guy’s birthday party).
Deposits are held by the agent and paid to you when you perform the gig
(after deducting their commission).
You never want to put your tickets on sale without a deposit. If the promoter
goes wonky and disappears with your money, you’ll have to cancel the show,
and the fans will get mad at you for aking out after they bought their tickets.

Business Manager
Your business manager is in charge of all nancial aspects of the tour. This job
begins way before the tour starts, by forecasting (a fancy accounting word for

predicting) the income and expenses, and projecting how much you’re going to
make or lose. If you’re a new band, this information helps you go to the record
company and beat them up for tour support (see page 187). At all levels, it helps
avoid unhappy surprises.
When the tour gets going, all your road personnel (the people who set up the
equipment, supervise your crew, etc.) are on payroll, and the business manager
is in charge of getting everyone paid. He or she also makes sure your
performance fees are collected from the promoters (which is physically done by
a tour manager or tour accountant, if you have one) and that all bills (travel,
hotels, food, etc.) are paid. They handle withholding taxes (both by states and
foreign countries) and le tax returns in all those places. It’s also the business
manager’s responsibility to make sure the tour doesn’t run over budget without
an alarm being sounded in advance, while there’s still a chance to x it.
The business manager, through a tour accountant if the tour is big enough,
also double-checks everyone’s math while the tour is happening. This not only
means catching innocent errors, but also making sure that promoters don’t pad
the expenses to make a few extra dollars (more about that later).

Tour Manager
If you have a tour manager (and if not, your personal manager should be doing
this job), he or she is responsible for everything running smoothly on the road.
They make sure that your hotel reservations are in fact there, that your airline
tickets are con rmed, that the bus is where it’s supposed to be, that you’re on
the bus when you’re supposed to be, etc. They also deal with the band, dancers,
truck companies, bus companies, sound and light companies, and anyone else
who needs care and feeding. It’s the tour manager who’s responsible for
collecting the money after each show, reviewing the promoter’s accounting on
the night of the show (called settling the box o ce or the settlement), and
depositing the dough in the right place. (As you move up the ladder, you’ll have
a tour accountant doing the money part of the job.)

Promoter

Promoters are the people in each market who hire you for the evening and are
responsible for marketing your show and maximizing your ticket sales. They
can be “local” (meaning they work only in one city or area), regional (several
states), national (covering the entire United States), or international. (National
promoters also book regionally as well as nationally.) Promoters rent the hall
(which means they owe rent even if nobody shows up), pay for marketing the
concert, and supervise the overall running of the show.
Promoters actually have a tough time. If they lose, they can lose big, but as
acts get more successful, the artists squeeze the deals and limit the promoter’s
upside (as discussed below). The result is a friendly game of “hide the pickle”
that promoters routinely play in stating their expenses. But I’m getting ahead of
myself, because we’re going to talk about this later (on page 404).
Two companies, Live Nation and AEG, are international promoters who
purchase entire tours. In other words, they make a deal to promote every date,
all over the world. These deals have their own complexities, which we’ll discuss
when we get to promoter deals on page 414.
Over the last few years, venues (meaning the owners of the physical
buildings—the amphitheaters, arenas, etc.) have begun buying shows
themselves. Deals for these are imaginatively called venue deals. As we
discussed above, promoters traditionally rent the buildings from the owners,
then turn around and make the deals with the artists. Under venue deals, the
building owners contract directly with the artists, in e ect acting as promoters
themselves. In fact, they’re directly competing with the promoters who rent
from them.
Sometimes the venues will pay artists more than promoters pay. This is partly
because they’ve eliminated the middleman, but more importantly, it’s because
they have income from parking, food, beverage sales, and other areas that
promoters don’t share.
Another alternative is what you might call “invisible venues” (not an
industry term). By “invisible” I mean you can do an entire tour in these places
and none of your friends will ever know about it. I’m talking about state and
county fairs (it may surprise you to hear that fairs pay big money for artists,
because it brings people in to see the prize cows and spend money throwing

darts at balloons), casinos (same idea of luring in gamblers), and performing
arts centers. Performing arts centers are small theaters (1,200 to 4,000 seats)
that put on all kinds of entertainment for their local community. These are
things like dramatic and musical theater, classical symphonies, family shows,
well-known speakers, and touring musical artists.
For the right kind of act (usually an older demographic, stars from the ’60s
through ’90s, country, Christian, etc.) these invisible shows can be very
pro table.

MARKETING
Historically, concerts were marketed by advertising in newspapers, on radio,
and (for really big tours) on TV. But now almost all the marketing happens on
the Internet. Which is also where the ticket sales happen—in fact, virtually all
tickets are sold over the Internet (the only exception being small clubs and the
like, where people might walk up for tickets on the night of the show).
Accordingly, your visibility and presence on the Web (streaming numbers,
YouTube views, your website, social media, blogs, email blasts, tweets, etc.) go a
long way toward bringing warm bodies into your shows.
As discussed previously, credit card companies are sometimes involved in
marketing, in exchange for the ability to sell tickets to their card members
before the public sale.

PERSONAL APPEARANCE DEALS
It’s di cult to make much money touring until you’re a pretty big star. In the
traditional music biz, you couldn’t put a lot of tushies into concert seats until
you’d sold a lot of records. Until then, you were touring to create a buzz, get a
record deal, sell records, and then tour pro tably. Now it’s about streaming
hits, which not only drive ticket sales, but also give you a road map to your fans
—the streaming data tells you where the listens are coming from. However,
there are (and always have been) artists who have low streaming numbers (low

sales and airplay in the old days) but who pack concert halls. Conversely, some
artists stream in the hundreds of millions but can’t ll a high school auditorium.
Some bands can tour locally and regionally, build a base of 500 to 1,000
people per night, sometimes even ll 3,500-seat theaters, all without a record
deal. This seems to work best for DJs, rockers, jam bands, and digital stars (like
YouTube phenoms) who can build a huge audience that wants to see them in
person. We talked before (on page 16) about the ways new artists can build a
buzz through direct contact with their fans, and if it works, performers like this
can make money and develop a cult following. Which can lead to a healthy
touring career and a record deal (if they want one).
In the beginning, unless you’re one of these phenoms, you’ll most likely lose
money on touring. You’ll also get stuck opening for another act, sitting in
uncomfortable dressing rooms, and eating food left over from last night’s
headliner. And you’ll be regularly humiliated, playing to half-empty concert
halls, since the audience is coming later to see someone else. Also, the people
who show up early will be buying beer, talking loudly during your ballads, and
chanting the headliner’s name if they don’t like your show. Otherwise, it’s a
blast.
Ready to sign up? Let’s look at the anatomy of personal appearance deals:

New Artists
Your rst goal as a new artist is to play as a headliner in clubs (meaning venues
of 100 to 1,500 people or so). In the very beginning, a lot of clubs will only take
you if you buy a certain number of tickets to your show, which you then have
to re-sell (or eat). If you can’t sell enough tickets to cover yourself, then a good
way to build a buzz is by playing local clubs that have themed nights of cool
music from unknown acts (for example, in Los Angeles, a club called Bardot
has “School Night” each week, which is a lineup of new bands). Assuming the
club has enough credibility, there’ll be a built-in audience, and hopefully fans

and tastemakers will show up and blog about you, or at least be a loudmouth to
their friends.
If you’re signed to a record label, you might get a gig as the opening act on a
big tour. How you get to be the opening act on a major tour is very political. If
your record is only doing so-so, and there are several other groups in your
position, then it depends on the clout of your manager and agent—it’s that
simple and cold. If you’re streaming well, have a hot video, or are generating
big numbers on social media, you’ll have an edge in the political process. But
it’s still political. The exception is where you’re really exploding out of the box.
In this case, the headliners may be clamoring for you. For example, a wellknown headliner may not be selling tickets very well and want a hot new
opening act to bring in younger people.
If you can build enough of a pro le to get yourself booked at a festival
(meaning an all-day or multi-day event, like Coachella, ACL, Bonnaroo, etc.),
that’s another way to push your career forward. In the beginning, you could
end up playing at eleven in the morning to about a hundred hungover people,
which is marginal of course, and likely you’ll lose money. But at least you can
say you were on that festival, and try to parlay that into booking another festival
or getting a support slot on a tour. And if your performance sets o an Internet
buzz, it can truly move the needle. Of course, everyone’s vying for these festival
slots, so getting one takes serious momentum, usually coupled with an
aggressive manager or agent. And politics.

Fees
If your record is beginning to make some noise, or you’ve got a local following,
you can get fees in the range of $250 to $1,500 per night, either from clubs or
opening slots. If you’re really big in the local/regional scene (like we discussed
above for jam bands), and can draw 1,000 or so people per show, you can get
$5,000 to $10,000 or even more per night. And if you’re big enough to get an
opening slot on a big tour, your fee can go higher (see the numbers in the
midlevel artist section below).

Splits/Guarantees
Some clubs will pay you no front money, but will give you a split of the gate
(meaning a share of the money charged for admission). The splits run from 20%
to 60%, depending on your stature, and also depending on the number of other
acts on the bill. For example, if there are three acts, you might divide up 60% of
the gate. If your band is the biggest draw (meaning you draw in the biggest
crowds), you can ask for more than an equal share. Sometimes you can even get
100% of the gross after the promoter gets back his or her expenses for the
evening (advertising, sound, lights, etc.), and with a lot of clout, you can get
100% of all the gross (the promoter makes money selling beer to your fans).
This is most common when the promoter is also the club owner and is happy to
break even on the door charge just to get thirsty mouths into the seats.
As to the accuracy of the club’s count, you’ll have to rely on the club’s
reputation or else have Bruno, your three-hundred-pound roadie, stand at the
door and check.
If you’re really hot locally, you might get a minimum guarantee of $100 to
$250 or so against your share of the gate. Or maybe just take a higher fee, of say
$500 to $800 per night (with no share of the gate). And sometimes the club will
pay you a fee equal to what you’d get for a sellout, meaning they’re taking the
entire risk (instead of you). (I’m basing the numbers in this section on the club
scene in Los Angeles, because it’s the one where I have the best info. These are
also based on a ticket price of about $10 to $15. I’m told the basic pattern holds
true for most major cities.)

Expenses
The minimum cost of putting yourself on the road is the money to rent a van
you can use to carry equipment and sleep in, plus three meals a day at
McDonald’s. And you’d better get along really well with each other, or else
expect some violent crimes.
The next step up (three or four to a room in cheap motels, slightly better
meals, and maybe someone to help move the equipment) gets a lot more

expensive. But if you watch it carefully, you can get by cheap enough to play
the independent circuit and make a few bucks.
If you’re headlining larger clubs, or if you’re the opening act on a bigger
act’s tour, the minimum cost of putting a four-piece band on the road can run
around $10,000 per week, broken down roughly as $1,000 for crew, $2,000 for
food and hotels, $2,500 for equipment and personnel costs, and $4,500 for
insurance, commissions to managers and agents, equipment repairs, etc. With
travel, setup, etc., you can’t really do more than ve shows per week, and you
don’t need to be a math genius to see that you’re going to lose money. Five
nights at even $1,500 per night is only $7,500, which is $2,500 per week less
than it costs you to be there. And the longer you stay out the more you’re going
to lose.
So where does this lost money come from? (See page 187 if you don’t
remember the answer.)

Internet Phenoms
Just because you’re a massive smash on the Net, there’s no guarantee you’ll sell
tickets. A lot of fans these days are into songs, not artists, as we discussed on page
20. So don’t expect your touring to jump ahead of the line, barring very
extraordinary circumstances. The folks who really make money on tours are
usually people who have worked for years on the road, honing their acts,
learning how to really work the audience.

Midlevel Artists
Let’s assume you’re past the new-artist level, with a lot of social media, and
you’re streaming in the hundreds of thousands or low millions. You now have
the option, in addition to opening for a major artist or playing clubs, of
headlining small venues.
At this point, you should at least be able to break even, and you may be able
to take home a pro t. If you’re going out as an opening act on a big tour, you
should be able to make about $5,000 to $50,000 per night, depending on the

stature of the headliner, size of the venues and ticket pricing, and your heat.
Most of these opening act deals are in the $20,000 to $30,000 range.
If you’re headlining small venues (1,500 to 2,500 seaters), you are likely in
the $5,000 to $25,000 range, depending on your stature, the size of the venue,
pricing, etc. If you can headline small amphitheaters (meaning venues of
about 5,000 seats), you can get anywhere from $20,000 to $100,000 or more
per night, depending on the ticket pricing. Meaning…
As we touched on earlier, many artists like to keep their tickets cheap (in the
range of $20 to $35 per ticket), for their credibility and/or the fact that nobody
will come if they raise their prices. If this is you, because of what it costs to be on
the road, you’ll break even or make a small pro t. However, if you’re able and
willing to charge $40 plus per ticket, you can make a decent pro t. And if you
can get a $50 to $60 or higher ticket price, you could get $250,000 or more per
night! Note also, because your expenses are xed, the rst $10 to $15 per ticket
covers them. Thus, almost every dollar of increase (which isn’t exactly true
because the promoter, manager, and agent take a part, as we’ll discuss in more
detail in a minute) goes directly to your bottom line (meaning into your
pocket).
At midlevel you can also get into splits, which are usually 85% of the pro ts.
(We’ll discuss splits in detail under superstars, so I won’t ruin the surprise.) The
only di erence is that the guarantees against splits at this level are of course
lower than the superstars’ guarantees (midlevel artist guarantees are in the range
of $7,500 to $25,000 per show, or more if you raise your ticket price).

Heritage Acts
Heritage acts are classic artists of the 1960s, ’70s, ’80s, ’90s, etc., that once
lled arenas (12,000 plus seaters), but no longer draw such big crowds. They’ve
settled into a comfortable touring groove that keeps them on the road for much
of the year and makes them a good living. Other than the obvious superstars
from these eras (Paul McCartney, the Stones, Springsteen, etc.), their deals fall
somewhere between the high end of the midlevel deals and the superstar deals of
the next section. They play amphitheaters, festivals, fairs, performing arts

centers, and casinos, and generally stick to comfy places with plush seats because
most of their fans are older (despite what the band may think). The plus side of
an older audience is that they have more money, so they can pay more for a
ticket—after all, it’s not just a show, it’s a trip back to their youth (well,
musically, anyway).
A lot of the heritage dates are something called a soft ticket, which means
that people come for reasons besides the show. For example, casinos give free
tickets to their high-rollers; performing arts centers have season subscribers; and
fairs draw people who may catch the show after a day of deep-fried Twinkies and
pig races. (Hard tickets mean just the opposite; it’s a show where people only
come to see your performance, such as in an arena.)
Because heritage acts spend a lot of time on the road, they hit the same
markets frequently. So they often package themselves in a doubleheader with
another heritage act to keep people from saying, “I think I’ll pass because I saw
them last year.”

Superstar Touring
Now we get into some real fun. And some real money. If you pay close
attention, I’ll tell you how to put a lot more bucks in your pocket. If you
choose not to listen, don’t get mad when your agent, personal manager, and
other team members have more money than you at the end of the tour.

Splits
First let’s look at the money you can earn. Instead of being paid a at fee,
superstars get a guarantee against a percentage of the net pro ts or gross of
the show. (As with the new and midlevel deals, your share is called a split. These
deals are also known as versus deals, because you get a guarantee versus a
percentage, whichever is higher.)
Guarantees work exactly the same way as an advance against your record
royalties; if you don’t make any pro ts, you still keep the guarantee. If you do
make pro ts, the promoter deducts the guarantee and pays you the excess.

These numbers are not chopped liver. Major artists in arenas (meaning
venues of 12,000 to 20,000) get guarantees in the range of $100,000 to
$500,000 plus per night, sometimes as high as $1 million or more. Also, major
artists can often sell multiple nights in the same venue, which can be a
substantial savings of costs—you don’t have to move the equipment, yourself,
and your crew every night, and you can get a better rental rate for the concert
hall when you’re a “long-term” tenant.
The usual split is from 85/15 to 90/10, meaning the artist gets 85% (or 90%)
of the net pro ts of the show, and the promoter gets 15% or 10%. Superstars
sometimes push promoters even further (e.g., 92.5/7.5, or even 95/5), but that
takes a lot of clout and it generally kicks in only after the promoter has gotten
back all their money. For example, there might be a 90/10 split until the
promoter breaks even, 92.5/7.5 to a certain level above break-even, then 95/5
after that. (There are also deals based on gross, which we’ll discuss on page 406.)
Here’s an example: If a date has gross ticket sales of $250,000 and the
promoter’s expenses are $150,000, there’s $100,000 in net pro ts ($250,000
income less $150,000 expenses). In a 90/10 deal, 90% of this, or $90,000, goes
to the artist. If the artist got a $60,000 guarantee, that’s deducted from the
artist’s share, so the artist gets an additional $30,000 (the $90,000 share of
pro ts less the $60,000 guarantee). Here’s a cheat sheet:
Gross Ticket Sales
Less: Promoter Expenses

$250,000
–$150,000

Net Pro ts
Times: 90%

$100,000
× 90%

Artist Share:
Less: Guarantee

$90,000
–$60,000

Payable on Night of Show

$30,000

The sensitivity of pro ts to ticket pricing, which we covered in the previous
section for midlevel artists, is even more dramatic when you get to the superstar
level. As we discussed, once you’ve covered expenses, almost all of the price
increase goes directly into your pocket. And stars who attract older audiences
normally charge in the range of $75 to $175 per ticket, with some superstars

charging $400 or more per ticket. Which means these artists can walk away with
truckloads of money.
We previously discussed charging higher prices for better seats, but now let’s
take a deeper dive into it. There are normally two, but sometimes up to four,
levels of pricing at each concert, from P1 (meaning Price 1, the most
expensive), down to P4 in the nosebleed section. The gray areas between these
sections (for example, the last row of P1 and the rst row of P2) are called ex,
and there’s a new trend in ticketing called exing the house—which means
you vary the ticket prices based on demand. For example, if the front orchestra
is selling well, the promoter may expand P1 pricing to include more of the
middle/back orchestra. If demand dies down, those seats drop to a P2 price.
Also, as we discussed on page 392, some artists put their tickets through a
platinum ticketing platform, which is another way to price tickets based on
demand.

Computation of Net Proﬁts
Let’s look at some of the ner points in computing net pro ts. Net proﬁts are
de ned as “gross receipts less the promoter’s expenses.” The calculation looks
like this:
Gross Receipts. Gross receipts means gross monies from ticket sales, less selling
costs (such as ticket fees, credit card charges), taxes, and facilities charges. That’s
pretty straightforward, but your team should go to great lengths to make sure
you get an accurate accounting. For example, some of my clients have their tour
accountant “count the house” (meaning they actually count the number of
seats and people in them) and/or (especially in dates where there are no seats)
stand at the door with a clicker and count the number of people who come in
(in response to which one promoter opened three other entrance doors without
telling us). There’s less of this abuse in today’s world of electronic ticketing, but
you still have to be careful.
Also included in gross receipts are the monies from VIP Ticketing, which
I’ll talk about in the next section.

Sometimes sponsorship money is also included, which is discussed on page
407.
Expenses. From the gross, the promoter deducts every expense he or she can
possibly think of. The major ones are:
1. Advertising. It’s obvious when you think about it, but not until then,
that the more important an artist you are, the less advertising money the
promoter has to spend. One or two announcements of a major show
usually does it. So watch this expense.
On the other hand, major stars don’t want the promoter to
underspend. That sounds weird at rst—in a pro ts deal, 85% to 90% of
the advertising is charged to you—but the reason is that advertising can
be a cross-promotion for a current record and your overall brand.
Advertising also helps make sure your tour is perceived as an “event.”
Some of the larger promoters own their own advertising agencies,
and the ad agency charges 15% on top of the advertising monies paid to
Internet sites, radio stations, etc. For example, if the promoter spends
$10,000 on radio ads, their ad agency would charge an extra $1,500
(15%), for a total of $11,500 in computing your pro ts. The promoters
argue that if they used an una liated advertising agency, they’d have to
pay this 15% (which is true), so why should you get a break? You say that
the promoter owns this agency, so the money is only moving from one
of the promoter’s pockets to another. If you have enough clout, most or
all of the 15% disappears.
2. Rent for the facility. This is straightforward unless your promoter also
owns the facility, in which case you need to make sure you’re getting a
marketplace deal.
3. Personnel (box o ce, cleanup, ushers, ticket takers, doormen, etc.)
4. Rental of equipment such as PA (public address system, meaning
speakers and sound equipment), lights, pianos, etc.
5. Insurance
6. Security

7. Stage crew
8. Ground transportation for the artist and entourage
9. Catering for artist and crew
10. Public performance license for the music (see page 229 for what this is)
11. Medical
12. Elvis impersonators (just seeing if you’re paying attention)
Over the years, as promoters’ pro t margins got more and more squeezed, they
developed systematic ways of “adding” to the expenses. Crasser promoters have
been known simply to create phony invoices for various items. A more
sophisticated example is where the promoter advertises so much on the local
radio station that they get a rebate at the end of the year. In other words, if they
spend $100,000 for ads on a radio station, the station gives them back $5,000 at
year end. This doesn’t show up on each individual invoice, and thus the shows
are charged for the full amount.
Another example is a rebate that promoters get from Ticketmaster and
certain venues, which they also don’t share.
The interesting part is that everyone knows what the promoters are doing,
and so there is this little “waltz of the toreadors” while your agent negotiates
how much the promoter can steal from you (using much more civilized terms,
of course). Because everyone knows what expenses really are, there are accepted
amounts of stealing, and it’s bad form for (a) the promoter to steal more than is
customary or (b) the artist to “catch” the promoter and not allow the accepted
level. So in this bizarre netherland, everyone reaches a happy compromise.

Promoter Proﬁt Deals
In a promoter pro t deal, a promoter’s pro t is added as an expense, which
has the e ect of delaying your split of proceeds until the promoter gets a
negotiated amount of money.
This is easier to explain using numbers. For example, if the gross from a
particular show is $100,000 and the expenses are $60,000, the net pro ts would
be $40,000 ($100,000 minus $60,000). If your deal is 90/10, you would get

90% of $40,000, or $36,000. However, if the promoter’s deal allows them to
add a pro t of $10,000 as an expense, the net pro ts would only be $30,000,
because the expenses are now $70,000 (the $60,000 actual expenses plus the
promoter’s $10,000 pro t). Thus you would get only 90% of $30,000, or
$27,000, instead of $36,000. (In other words, you got $9,000 less because
you’re paying 90% of the $10,000 pro t.)
Deals that add a promoter pro t are also called split point deals. That’s
because adding their pro t raises the point at which you split the net. Using the
above example, if there were no promoter pro t, you would split the monies
after $60,000 of gross income (when the gross equals the expenses). In a split
point deal, you wouldn’t start sharing until the gross equals $70,000 (expenses
plus a $10,000 promoter pro t), so $70,000 becomes the split point.
As your bargaining power increases, the promoter’s ability to add a pro t
disappears.

Splits Based on Gross
Some superstar acts get a percentage of gross income. (In these deals, the
expenses are of course irrelevant.) The range is 65% to 70% of gross, and the
artist can get even more when the ticket prices are high. Remember, the
expenses are xed, so that as gross income (i.e., the ticket price) goes up,
expenses become a smaller percentage of the gross. Which means the artist can
get a bigger piece of it. For example, if the expenses were $50,000 and the gross
was $100,000, the expenses are 50% of the gross. But if the gross was $200,000,
the $50,000 expenses would only be 25%. So the higher the ticket price, the
bigger the artist’s share of gross.
Actually, these deals are not based strictly on “gross,” but on something
bizarrely called net gross. Net gross means the promoter’s gross income, less
surcharges (amounts the building adds to the ticket price and keeps for itself),
ticket fees, credit card fees, parking (if parking is part of the ticket price), and
taxes.

VIP TICKETING

Another pro t center for big tours is VIP Ticketing. These are P1 tickets (the
most expensive tickets) packaged with a value bonus. The bonus might be a
basket of goodies (signed photo, signed poster, special T-shirt not otherwise
available, custom spatulas, etc.), or a special area in the venue with drinks and
maybe food, or even a meet-and-greet with the artist before or after the show.
Some VIP packages let you into the venue early to watch a sound check
(essentially a rehearsal where the artist does a few songs onstage to make sure the
sound is right in the arena), sometimes followed by a question-and-answer
session with the artist from the stage.
If you’re doing a national tour with one promoter (more about that later, on
page 410), VIP Ticketing is usually built into the overall deal. If not, there are
companies that specialize in VIP Ticketing, including some merchandising
companies, who will handle this for you. These folks put together the packages,
sell the tickets, make arrangements with the venues, manage the fans when they
get there, etc. The VIP Ticketing companies charge 10% to 25% for this, which
includes all the costs (the merchandise, customer service fees, building rentals,
etc.).

SPONSORSHIP
Major tours can do deals with sponsors, who pay money to be associated with
the tour as a marketing move. The terms of the deals vary massively, depending
on your stature, the length of the tour, and the rights you’re giving the sponsor.
For example, is it just a tour sponsorship, or are you also doing a commercial?
Are they the only sponsor? If not, are they the main sponsor, or are they an
“also presents”?
I’ve seen deals from as little as $10,000 for a baby band, to well into seven
gures for major stars. I know that’s not particularly helpful, but it’s a little like
trying to answer the question “How much is a car?”
The major deal sponsorship points are:
1. How many dates are they sponsoring?
2. In what territories?

3. What is the exclusivity? For example, if your sponsor is a soft drink, what
products do you have to avoid endorsing besides other soft drinks? It’s
almost always bottled water and avored waters, but it could be liquor.
And sometimes the soft drink company owns other companies that make
random things like computers, so they don’t want you endorsing those
rivals either.
4. Are you doing a commercial? If so, in what media, and in what
territories? And how long can they run it?
5. Can they use your music in their ads? If so, who’s paying the record
company and publisher for the rights?
6. Do they get free tickets? Free tickets cost you money on a hot tour,
because you won’t get the price of the tickets from fans. Whether or not
the sponsor gets freebies, they will want the right to buy tickets before
the public gets them. If you agree to that, how many tickets do they get,
and in what sections?
7. Will you do a meet and greet with the sponsor’s guests? If so, how many
times, how many guests, and in which markets?
8. How will the sponsor’s name be positioned on tickets, and in tour ads?
9. How will the sponsor’s banners be positioned in the venues?
I’m only scratching the surface here, because these deals get pretty complex and
are very individualized. But you get the idea.

HALL FEES
Over the last few years, agents have become responsible for negotiating hall fees.
A hall fee is the amount charged by the building for selling merchandise (Tshirts, posters, etc.), and it’s a percentage of the gross sales. We’ll hit this in detail
in the next chapter (on page 424), so hang loose ’til then.

RIDERS

The actual contracts for each appearance are customarily handled by the agency.
At lower levels, they’re merely printed union contracts, though most agents
have standard forms they attach. As you hit midlevel to superstar, they’re the
same printed forms with an attached rider (an addendum that rides on top of
another contract). Your attorney (together with your manager and agent) puts
the rider together for you, and it’s the guts of the deal. The contract itself is only
one or two pages, listing the speci c terms (dates, guarantee, hall size, splits,
etc.). Riders can run thirty pages or more.
Here are the major points covered in your rider:
Expenses. If your deal involves a split of pro ts, the promoter’s expenses
should be listed separately, with maximum amounts for each category.
(Sometimes this list is in the contract itself.) In other words, the rider says you
can only be charged for the actual expense, or the maximum in the contract,
whichever is less. The rider should also spell out your right to verify expenses by
auditing invoices, checks, etc.
Free Tickets. You should get a certain number of free tickets for yourself
(called comps, an abbreviation of complimentary) to each performance (usually
fty to one hundred, though that varies with the size of the venue). You also
want to limit the number of free tickets that the promoter can give away
without your consent (usually twenty- ve or so). Also, as noted above, if you
have a tour sponsor, you may have to give and/or sell tickets to them, and the
rider covers this as well. Keep this in mind with respect to freebies: If you had
sold these tickets, 85% to 90% of the money from those sales would have been
yours. So go easy on the comps.
Free tickets are usually a minimal item, and not a big deal. However, some
artists may not do so well in certain cities, so the promoter might give away as
many tickets as humanly possible to make the house look full. This is called
papering the house, and it’s done very quietly. (If you nd a lot of police
o cers, re ghters, city council members, and similar folks boogying and/or
holding their ears in your audience, there’s a good chance you’ve been
papered.)

I use an interesting clause that says the promoter’s free tickets can’t be in the
rst ten rows. Can you guess why? (Answer on page 418.)
Billing. Billing means the way your name is listed (how you will be billed) in
ads and publicity, and on billboards, tickets, the venue marquee, and anywhere
else that credits show up. You of course want 100% headline billing, and you
should have the right to approve the presence and size of anybody else’s name
along with yours.
Recording. The rider should have strict prohibitions against the promoter
recording your performance in any way, whether audio or visual. A poorquality (or even worse, a good-quality) bootleg recording is a serious rip-o of
your professional life, not to mention a possible violation of your record deal. I
put in extraordinarily tough language, including high damages for a violation.
With the advent of smartphones, it’s impossible to keep audience members
from photographing or recording shows (unless you make them check their cell
phones before they go in, but most artists see that as a buzzkill, and the fans
don’t like it much either. Plus, some fans sneak in their phones anyway). So the
best you can do is print on your tickets that they can’t use professional
equipment or commercially exploit anything they record. Or hire storm
troopers to goose-step through the auditorium.
As we alluded on page 178, festivals regularly require you to give them
broadcast/webcast rights for all but the biggest superstars, and even for those
folks, the festivals will want the right to broadcast/webcast a few songs. You
pretty much have to do this, but your record company must get in the mix
because their exclusivity covers these rights. Some of the bigger festivals have
pre-negotiated deals with the major labels, so that side’s covered, but be sure to
tell your label what you’re up to. And even if you’re out of your label deal, be
careful of the re-recording restriction, as we discussed on page 179.
You also want to limit how long they can keep your performance on their
website. Typical limitations are twenty-four hours for the live stream (to let
them rebroadcast for time zones around the world), then about sixty days for
on-demand streaming of up to three songs. Bigger artists can limit the on-

demand to two songs. They’ll also try for the right to use clips for news
reporting and to market the next year’s festival, which is generally ne if you
approve the materials.
Merchandising. Your merchandiser will require you to include speci c
language giving them the exclusive right to sell merchandise at your concert.
(Merchandising is discussed in Chapter 24.)
Interviews/Promos. Be sure the promoter can’t commit you to any
interviews or local promotions or sponsors without your consent.
Catering. I had so much fun reading the catering requirements of riders that
I once made it a hobby (that hobby didn’t last too long…). Many riders have
three or more pages listing food and drink that the promoter has to provide for
the artist and the crew. They range from mundane foods for the crew to true
exotica for the headliner. (I always get a kick out of artists who require organic,
GMO-free antioxidants, together with six cases of beer.) Here are some of the
better items, actually lifted from various riders over the years:
Turkey (white meat only; never rolled or pressed)
Gourmet-grade co ee—no canteen type
Lactaid nonfat milk
Shelled red pistachios
M&Ms, with the brown ones removed
Technical. You need to have very speci c technical speci cations for your
show, such as the size of stage, what equipment the promoter has to supply,
power requirements, security needs, dressing room facilities, sound check
(meaning the time you can come into the actual venue and set the levels of your
sound equipment), etc. Sometimes this is in a separate tech rider.
Legal. Riders have a lot of legal sections regarding cancellation, bad weather,
riots, mechanics of payment, insurance, lawyer jokes, etc.

I’LL TAKE THE WHOLE THING…
As I previously mentioned, many artists sell their entire tour to a single
promoter. These deals look very similar to single-night deals, except of course
they cover all the dates. The major economic di erence is that all the dates are
cross-collateralized (we discussed this concept in record deals on page 89). For
tours, it means the promoter gets back their losses on turkeys from successful
shows. This of course isn’t good for you as an artist—without crosscollateralization, you’d get paid on the good dates, and the promoters would eat
the bad ones. On the other hand, you can usually get a larger overall guarantee
in these deals because the promoter is hedging their risk.
Sometimes you can get a limited cross-collateralization. For example, the six
major market dates might be crossed with each other (but not any other dates)
the eight secondary market dates are only crossed with each other, etc.
These overall deals are logistically easier because you only have to deal with
one promoter, and you only have to do one contract for the entire tour, as
opposed to separate negotiations for each date. But since you’re dealing with a
huge promoter, and gargantuans tend to ex their muscles, they can push back
harder than individual promoters.
As discussed on page 406, when you’re doing one of these deals, the issue of
VIP Ticketing comes up. The national promoter wants these rights as part of
the package, and their guarantee is priced higher because it includes VIP
package income as well as straight concert revenue.
The major promoters have divisions that do VIP Ticketing, and of course
they want you to use their VIP company. If the promoter allows you to use an
independent VIP company, the promoter will want the income put into gross
(which means they can use it to recoup their guarantee). You can sometimes
make a deal to keep all the VIP income yourself, but it’ll mean less of a
guarantee.
The national promoters also want to share in any tour sponsorship income.
Their argument is that it’s an element of the tour and therefore the money
should go in the pot. But this is negotiable. Some deals include sponsorship if
the promoter nds the sponsor (for which they’ll want a 20% fee o the top,

before putting the money into gross). With enough clout, and if their advance
o er wasn’t based on getting sponsorship money, you can keep at least a
portion of the sponsorship income outside the pot. If the sponsorship deal
includes a commercial endorsing the sponsor’s product that doesn’t mention
the tour, you should keep all of that money yourself.
There’s some controversy over what these one-promoter tour deals mean for
the agents. Some people argue that, since you only have to make one deal
(instead of the usual multiple deals for a tour with di erent promoters), maybe
you don’t need an agent. On the other hand, someone needs to supervise the
national promoter, and agents have a lot of experience working with them. For
example, you need to make sure the promoter is properly marketing your tour,
that you’re getting an honest expense reconciliation, that the promoter is
making the best deals with the venues (in fact, some of these promoters own the
venues, so you have to be especially careful how they deal with themselves), etc.
So arguably these big promoters need even more supervision—you’re dealing
with one powerful source, rather than a number of smaller players.
Good, bad, or ugly, these overall deals are pretty much the norm for major
acts. However, when the promoters consolidated into two big players, little
seedlings began winding their way through the cracks. In other words,
alternatives to the big players are starting to grow up as forces in the
marketplace. Speci cally, these are the “invisible venues” we discussed on page
395, meaning fairs, casinos, and performing arts centers, and also the direct
venue deals we discussed.

MULTI-SHOW DEALS
A new creature that’s developed over the last few years is the idea of making
multi-show deals that aren’t tied to speci c gigs. Under these contracts, you
agree to perform a set number of shows, but the dates and locations are worked
out in the future. For example, a promoter signs you up for fty shows over the
course of the next year or two, at times and places to be mutually agreed.
Generally, these deals pay up to half the money when you sign, and
sometimes you can also get nonrecoupable money as a bonus.

Multi-show deals are exclusive, meaning you can’t perform live for anyone
else during the term of the deal. Because of this, they’re very close in concept to
a record deal, where only one company has the rights to your services.
However, there are some things you should carve out of the exclusivity. At a
minimum, you should have the right to do non-public gigs (for corporations, in
connection with a sponsorship deal, for some rich dude’s wedding, etc.), as well
as charity concerts, radio concerts (see page 185), and TV appearances.
So how did these multi-show deals come about? And why would you want
one?
From the promoter’s point of view, they want to tie you up because they’re
betting you’ll get hotter. If they’re right, they not only get a bargain price for
your shows, but they also keep you from playing for their competitors. It’s not a
coincidence that the biggest players in the multi-show game are Live Nation
and AEG, who both control venues they need to keep lled.
From your point of view, you can get substantial guaranteed money
(multimillions, if you’re really hot), and you can get a good chunk of the dough
up front. So if you need or just want a big check, these are the deals for you. In
addition, the promoters say that they’ll put more juice behind you if you’re
exclusively tied to them. For example, they’ll market you in all the venues they
control, push you on their ticketing sites, etc. But there are some downsides, as
we’ll discuss.
Multi-show deals come in two avors: guarantee deals and earnouts.
A guarantee deal means there’s an amount of money guaranteed for a set
number of concerts. This is exactly like the deals we just described for a speci c
tour, except that it doesn’t specify which shows you’ll be playing. For example,
you might get a $1 million guarantee for twenty shows on mutually agreed
dates over the next year, meaning $50,000 per night. Of that money, you might
get $500,000 on signing, and the balance as the shows are played.
Note that you’ll have expenses when you play these shows (travel, sound,
lights, band, hotels, etc.), so you want to make sure there’s enough money left
(after you take a chunk up front) to cover each date’s expenses, ideally with
some pro t on top. Otherwise, if you’ve gotten your entire pro t on signing,

you’ll be on the road making zero. Or writing a check to cover expenses. Which
means you won’t be so anxious to head out…
You’re probably thinking, hey, “No sweat, I’ll just do twenty dates, and if the
promoter bets wrong and loses money, too bad.” Well, that’s mostly true under
a guarantee deal. I say “mostly” because it’s not always the case; if the promoter
hasn’t earned back the guarantee at the end of twenty shows, they want the right
to tack on more dates (the norm is 10% to 20% of the total dates, meaning two
to four additional dates in our twenty-show example). You of course don’t get
paid for those, because you’re still paying o your guarantee. But after those
shows, even if you’re still in the hole, you can walk.
Because the promoter is risking that you might walk out and leave them with
a loss, guarantee deals are not easy to come by. And for the same reason, if you
can do a guarantee deal, it will pay you less money than an earnout deal.
Speaking of earnouts…
The far more common multi-show deal is an earnout, which means the
term of the deal continues until you earn back the money, regardless of the
number of shows. Using our example of $1 million over twenty dates, in an
earnout deal, the twenty shows are really just a minimum—the term of the deal
is extended until you’ve played enough dates for the promoter to get back their
money. And if your career does a belly op, that could be a LONG time.
During which you might be working for zero because you’ve already gotten all
the dough.
In other words, an earnout deal is really a loan that you’ll have to pay back
one way or another. It never goes away; it just sits in the bushes, waiting for
you…
The lesson is, in an earnout deal, always try for a right to end the deal by
repaying the unrecouped money. The promoter may want more than just the
unearned balance, such as 110% of it, on the same theory we discussed in paying
back an unrecouped balance for publishing deals (see page 308), or it might
want interest on the outstanding money. If the promoter agrees to repayment,
you’ll only have this right after you’ve played the minimum number of shows
(to keep you from walking out early if you get incredibly hot halfway through
the deal). For example, if you play twenty shows and earn back only $900,000

of the $1 million, you’ll be short by $100,000 but could pay them $110,000
and be done. You won’t likely have the money to write a check, but your next
promoter will. Or more commonly, when you get near the end of the deal, you
renegotiate with your promoter to extend the term and get more money.
Which furthers the promoter’s original goal of keeping you in their orbit.

LINING YOUR POCKETS WITH MORE GOLD
And now to my promised method of making you more money. Let me rst say
a couple of words about money in general.

More Income versus Cutting Expenses
It’s more expensive to put another dollar of income in your pocket than it is to
put a dollar of cost savings in your pocket. This may sound a bit weird, so let me
explain.
For every dollar of income you make, you have to pay your manager, agent,
and perhaps business manager and/or lawyer (if they’re on a percentage) out of
it. This will leave, for example, only about 65¢ to 75¢ to go into your pocket.
On the other hand, for every dollar of expense you save, the whole dollar goes
in your pocket because you’ve already paid the professionals on the money that
would have been used to pay the expense. (Of course, if your professionals are
paid a percentage of your net income instead of your gross, it doesn’t save
money, but I still want you to cut costs for your and their sakes.)
Let’s look at an example: Suppose your tour grosses $1 million, and your
professional team’s fees total 35% ($350,000). This means that you have
$650,000 after commissions, out of which you have to pay $400,000 in
expenses. Thus, your net after everything is $250,000 (I’m ignoring income
taxes).
Had you earned another $100,000 on the tour, 35% would have gone o
the top to your professional team, leaving you $65,000. Since your expenses are
already covered, the full $65,000 would be in your pocket. Thus, your net after
everything is $315,000 ($250,000 plus the $65,000). On the other hand, if you

didn’t earn another $100,000, but instead saved $100,000 in expenses, the
picture looks quite di erent: Instead of deducting $400,000 in expenses, you’d
deduct only $300,000, and your net after everything would be $350,000. You
thus keep the full $100,000 by cutting expenses, which is almost 60% more than
the $65,000 you would put in your pocket by earning another $100,000.
Here’s a chart:

Earnings
Less Commissions (35%)
Subtotal
Less Expenses:
NET

Example
$1,000,000
–$350,000
$650,000
–$400,000
$250,000

EARN $100,000
more income
$1,100,000
–$385,000
$715,000
–$400,000
$315,000
($65,000
more in your pocket)

SAVE $100,000
expenses
$1,000,000
–$350,000
$650,000
–$300,000
$350,000
($100,000
more in your pocket)

If you add another zero or two to these numbers, they get even more
impressive.

What to Do
How do you pull o this minor miracle? It’s pretty simple, but you may not
like the answer:
Spend less.
Here are the biggest areas of abuse:
Salaries. Watch carefully how much you’re paying your band and crew, and
really think about how many of them you need. This is primarily your manager
or tour manager’s area of expertise, and you obviously don’t want to scrimp on
essential personnel. But you don’t always need to carry as many people as you
think, or to pay them as much as they demand. And it’s not just salaries—for
every extra person, it’s also hotels, transportation, food, etc.
Be extra careful with friends and relatives. Hiring “pals” with little or
nothing to do is not only wasteful, it’s demoralizing to the people who really
work. And you have added expenses for hotels, food, etc.

Stage, Sound, and Lights. Your stage, sound, and lighting systems have to
be up to your level; anything less cheats your audiences. On the other hand,
these expenses can eat up a large chunk of your pro ts. And the costs aren’t just
the obvious ones of building fancier sets. Larger staging also means you need to
hire more trucks to haul the stu around, hire more folks to drive those trucks,
and hire more crew to load the stu , unload it, set it up, and tear it down. Not
to mention transporting, housing, and feeding those extra mouths. So plan
your staging smartly.
Remember, your fans are there to see you perform, and if you need an array
of animals and rocket ships to keep their attention, either something is wrong
with your show or you’re being insecure and hiding behind the hoopla. (You’re
better than that—you wouldn’t be where you are if you weren’t.) Of course
you should always do something innovative and spectacular, but be practical as
well.
Start-up Costs. It’s expensive to get ready for a big tour. There are equipment
costs, like building a stage, designing and renting sound systems, lighting rigs,
and video screens (all of these together are called the tour’s production,
meaning what it takes to put on [“produce”] the show). On top of production,
you have the cost of rehearsing the band and dancers, which means paying and
housing them (and some crew) for a number of weeks, as well as renting halls to
rehearse in. You can save a good amount of money by rehearsing the band and
dancers in a small venue, then waiting until just before the tour to move into a
big hall with the full stage, sound, lights, and videos.
Travel. You can save a lot by traveling light. This means two things:
1. Almost nothing I know of (except non-income-producing real estate
and owning a restaurant) eats money like chartering (or heaven forbid,
owning) your own jet. When you reach a certain level, particularly if
you’re a paparazzi magnet, it makes economic sense (or at least not a
signi cant di erence) to begin chartering planes. But for the most part,
ying commercial is feasible and substantially less expensive. I know it’s

more inconvenient—the hassles of the public in the airport and on the
plane, delayed ights, missing planes, etc.—but every major celebrity
and political gure has at one time or another own commercial, and all
survived the experience. Remember, it’s your money.
2. Try not to hub. Hubbing means you base yourself in a central location
(say, Dallas–Fort Worth) while you play venues within a short ight from
that city (other parts of Texas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas). When you stay
in one place like this, you double your mileage—every day you not only
y to the gig, but you have to y back. And most artists like to hub out of
expensive cities, which increases your hotel/lodging bills.
Catering. Some artists are particularly notorious for having lavish spreads
backstage, much of which is never eaten by them (or even touched by human
hands). Or, worse yet, it’s eaten by the hangers-on who show up to see what
they can scam. (I said that to make you mad; but it’s true.) Because these goodies
are supplied by the promoter as part of your deal, it feels like the promoter is
paying for them. But in truth, 90% of this expense is yours. Remember, as you
get into the major leagues, you make only a portion of your money from the
guarantee. A nice chunk of it comes from the pro t split, which is usually
90/10 (see page 401 for a description of pro t splits). Thus, every dollar spent
on food for scavengers is 90¢ less you put in your pocket. So ditch the imported
caviar and order in from Burger King.
Just Watch It. The above isn’t exhaustive; there are many other ways to cut
expenses (and I’m always surprised that people nd even more innovative ways
to spend money). I know the road is a hassle and you want to be comfortable.
There’s nothing wrong with that. But be mindful of your expenses and keep
them down. You’ll be glad you did when you get home and count your take.
Answer to question on page 409:
Nothing is as much fun as playing your heart out to a standing, screaming
audience, only to have a bunch of coat-and-tie zombies sitting in the rst ten
rows looking at their smartphones.

PART VI

Merchandising

24
Tour Merchandising

So now you’re famous, and kids can’t wait to plaster your face on their backs,
fronts, caps, bedroom walls, etc. And bootleggers can’t wait to rip you o by
illegally making your merchandise (more about bootleggers later).
Selling products (T-shirts, posters, hoodies, hats, etc.) that use your name,
logo, or likeness is called merchandising (also called merch).
As the world has swung to a mostly streaming model, merch is taking on an
interesting importance. With CD sales drying up like a Serengeti water hole, if
your fans want something tangible with your vibes in it, they’re limited to vinyl
(a “new technology” to youngsters) and merchandise. (Interestingly, a lot of
fans buy vinyl albums and never open them. So maybe that makes vinyl a form
of merch…? But maybe not, since most people don’t wear vinyl.) At any rate,
merch is one of the few ways that folks can visibly impress their friends by
showing they’re a fan of yours.
And apart from the money, every T-shirt is a walking billboard for you.
There are three avors of merch rights:
1. Tour merchandising. This is the stu sold at concert venues, for prices
you’d never pay anywhere else, so you can prove you were there.
2. Retail merchandising. This is basically the same stu (without tour
names or dates), but it’s sold in brick-and-mortar stores and through
those retailers’ websites.

3.D2C. This means Direct to Consumer, which is also called ECommerce, Web Store Sales, or Direct Sales. These are online sales
that deliver goods directly into the consumer’s hands, rather than going
through a retail store.
Digital merch, such as avatars, skins, and the like (which we discussed on
page 186) don’t t neatly into these categories. They’re generally treated as
licensing income, so you get a percentage of whatever your merchandiser gets
from the gaming company. There may be a time that your merchandiser can sell
directly to consumers on the gaming company platform (which would
probably be treated like a D2C), but it hasn’t happened yet.
Merchandisers will also run your fan club, if you want one. More about
that in the next chapter (on page 436). They can also handle your VIP Ticketing
(if your promoter doesn’t have those rights); see page 406 for a discussion of
VIP ticketing.
Of the three categories, tour merchandise is by far the more signi cant
moneymaker (assuming, of course, that you’re touring; otherwise, it doesn’t
mean much). While retail and D2C merchandising may be more visible, they
don’t create the same sales frenzy that concerts do, for the obvious reasons—
people are all pumped up by the show, they want a souvenir, they want to wear
something that says, “Nyah-nyah-nah, I was at the show, and you weren’t.”
So let’s discuss tour merchandising rst, then we’ll deal with retail and D2C
in the next chapter.

TOUR MERCHANDISERS
Tour merch can be a good source of dough. In the beginning, you can handle it
yourself by printing some T-shirts and selling them at your shows. However, as
you start to sell more tickets, and get to bigger venues, it takes a lot more e ort
to handle the sales. For example, you’ll need (a) more space to carry the stu
around, (b) someone without sticky ngers to do the selling and keep track of it,
and (c) a lot of administrative help, such as paying sales taxes, dealing with

border crossings and customs issues, etc. At that point, it makes sense to get a
merchandising company to take care of all this.
When you make a merch deal, you license the right to use your name and
likeness to someone cleverly called a merchandiser. A merchandiser, very
much like what a record company does for your recordings, is responsible for
manufacturing the goods, overseeing the sales at your concerts, and paying you
a royalty for each sale.

ROYALTIES
Most tour merchandising royalties are based on sharing the net pro ts from
your merch sales, though it’s sometimes possible (at the super-est of superstar
levels) to get a royalty based on the gross sales price of some items (more about
that in a minute). The computation of net pro ts is pretty much what it sounds
like: the merchandiser throws the gross selling price of all your merch into a pot,
then deducts the cost of manufacturing, credit card fees, overhead, freight, sales
taxes, VAT, hall fees (more about VAT and hall fees in a minute), etc.
The merchandiser usually wants a cap on how much they have to spend to
manufacture product, to keep you from getting carried away. That’s reasonable
as long as the cap is big enough to manufacture rst class goods.
The range of artist royalties for touring merchandise in the United States and
Canada is about 75% to 80% of pro ts, and there are higher splits for superstars.
It’s not uncommon to escalate your royalties based on sales, which can either be
on a per-night basis, or a cumulative basis for the entire tour. Major artists
sometimes have designer goods, such as a custom-made $100 plus sweatshirt or
a $500 plus leather jacket. Because a designer is paid a fee (or royalty) on these
goods, your royalty is lower, usually around 75% of net pro ts.
In the superstar world, you can sometimes (though almost never these days)
get a royalty based on gross sales, as opposed to the net, which means the
merchandiser doesn’t deduct the costs (well, actually, they deduct a few, as we’ll
discuss in the next paragraph). Of course, a royalty based on gross sales will be
lower than a royalty computed on net pro ts, because the base is so much
higher. The range is 30% to 40% for the United States, and Canada is often a

few percentage points less. This was historically how merch deals were done,
but it’s mostly now gone away in favor of a pro t share.
If you do get a gross sales royalty, the gross sales to which your royalty
percentage applies is a term of art. It means the selling price to the public, less
only taxes (sales tax, value-added tax, excise and similar taxes) and credit card
fees. Value-added tax, or VAT to its pals, is something we don’t have (yet) in
the United States, but it’s common in other countries. VAT is a tax on goods at
each stage of creation, based on the “value added” at that point. For example,
there’s a tax on the lumber mill as it cuts down a tree and turns it into lumber
(adding value); a tax on the furniture manufacturer when it turns the lumber
into furniture (more value added); a tax when the upholsterer does its thing,
etc. The tax gets bigger at each stage, but through a system of crediting back
(which I have never needed to fully understand, so I don’t) each guy gets a
credit for the tax paid by the previous guy. But it pumps up the price to the
consumer.
If you do get a deal based on gross sales, which as I said is rarer and rarer, the
merchandiser will put a cap on the cost of goods, and they won’t want to pay a
royalty on tour programs or specialty items (meaning “expensive items”).
That’s because the cost of creating these specialty goods is verry high. For
example, tour programs require someone to create the artwork, write the text,
clear the rights to the photos, and print them up. So the merch companies say
they can’t a ord to fork over a big piece of the gross price for these items and
instead pay you a pro t share.

HALL FEES
Your merchandiser doesn’t usually hire people to sell products in each of the
venues. Instead, they make a deal with the hall (meaning the building where
you’re playing) to supply the personnel, display racks, etc. It works like this:
The merchandiser pulls up its truck early on the day of the show, checks in a
certain quantity of merchandise to the hall personnel, and at the end of the
evening gets back the remaining merchandise plus payment for what’s been sold
or otherwise disappeared. From the money that’s turned over, the venue keeps a

percentage, and this is called a hall fee. It covers the cost of hiring people to
actually sell the crap plus the venue’s pro t. Hall fees often include a charge
(usually 1% of gross) for bootleg security (more about that in a minute). (By the
way, not all venues actually supply the merchandise personnel themselves.
There are a couple of companies that contract with venues to supply the
vendors. In that case, the independent company gets a percentage of the hall fee
from the venue.)
Your agent negotiates the hall fee percentage with the venue, though your
merchandiser may help. A standard hall fee range is from 20% to 25% of the
gross monies collected for the merchandise (minus tax), and superstars can
sometimes knock it down even lower. So if you sold $10,000 of merchandise
after deducting taxes, the hall would keep 20% to 25% ($2,000 to $2,500) and
pay the balance to the merchandiser. These are U.S. numbers. You can
sometimes get lower fees (18% to 20%) in foreign markets. You can also
negotiate a lower fee (10%) for “non-apparel” items like CDs, vinyl, or program
sales, which are called hard merchandise, as opposed to the T-shirts and other
fabrics, which are called soft merchandise.
In royalty deals (which are extremely rare as noted), the contract will have a
limit on hall fees, and if you go over the limit, the excess comes out of your
royalties. For example, a merchandise deal might say that you have a royalty of
40%, and that the hall fee can’t exceed 30%. Under this deal, if your hall fee for a
particular date was 35% (i.e., 5% more than the allowed 30%), the extra 5%
would come out of your 40% royalty.
There usually aren’t hall fee limits in pro t share deals, as you’re eating most
of the cost; in other words, if you have 80% of pro ts, you absorb 80% of the
hall fee.
Hall fees are negotiated by the artist’s agent (at the same time they make the
overall deal for the guarantee, splits, etc.). Ironically, the agent doesn’t get paid
for this—the agent’s commission is based on the artist’s earnings from the
performance only, and not from merchandising. So the agent is in the position
of negotiating a part of the deal that gives him or her no bene t. However, their
incentive goes way up when the artist glares daggers at them, so they’ve gotten
quite good at muscling down the hall percentages.

ADVANCES
As you learned from record and publishing deals, where there are royalties,
there are advances. And merchandising is just such a place. Unfortunately,
they’re not nearly as favorable as record and publishing advances, because
they’re almost always returnable. In other words, unlike the nonreturnable
advances you get from record companies and publishers, which you keep
whether earned or not, you might have to pay back some or all of the merch
advance (we’ll get into payback mechanics in a minute). Also, you might have
to pay them interest on top of repaying the advance, meaning you’d pay back
more than you got.
In other words, merchandising advances are very much like loans.
Tour merchandising advances are usually paid over the course of a tour. For
example, if your merchandising advance is $100,000, you might get $50,000
when you sign the deal, $25,000 a third of the way through the tour, and the
balance when you’ve done two-thirds of the dates. As your bargaining power
goes up, you can get more of the advance sooner.
A lot of artists use their merch advance to pay for the start-up costs of a
tour. Start-up costs are the monies you buzz through before you go on the road,
for example to buy equipment, rent a rehearsal hall, hire your crew, build a set,
put together sound and lights, hire dancers, jugglers, and mimes, etc.
The size of the advance is based on a projection of your merch pro ts times
your royalty rate. It’ll therefore be bigger for larger tours—the more bodies you
play for, the more merchandise you can sell. Advances will also be higher if the
deal includes retail and D2C merchandising (which we’ll discuss in the next
chapter).
Because they are so deal-speci c, it’s hard to give you any hard-and-fast
numbers. The broad range is anywhere from nothing to $25,000 or $50,000
for a developing act, to several million for a superstar.
Because the advances are returnable, and because the term gets extended if
you don’t earn them back (see our next topic), a number of artists opt to get a
better royalty rate and take less of an advance, or no advance at all. This is

particularly true for bigger artists who don’t need the money. If you’re with a
good merch company, you can often make more money this way.

TERM
The term of most merchandising agreements is eighteen to twenty-four
months, though it’s occasionally longer if you’re going on a massive tour.
However, if the advance isn’t recouped after that time, the term is automatically
extended until the date of recoupment. Which means the deal could go on
forever if your career crashes, or if you stop touring because you’re disabled or
bored.
When you’re negotiating a tour merch deal, try to get the right to repay the
advance and terminate the deal during these extensions. That keeps you from
having a perpetual merchandiser. For example, if you have a two-year deal with
an extension until recoupment, and at the end of two years you’ve recouped all
but $10,000 of a $500,000 advance, it means you’ve done pretty well.
However, if you don’t have the right to repay, the term would continue until
you recoup. Thus, the merchandiser could automatically get your next tour for
no advance. If you have the right to repay, however, you can write them a check
for $10,000, maybe plus interest and move on (you should be able to get more
than this amount from the advance you’ll get for your next tour). More
commonly, however, you rattle your saber by threatening to repay the advance,
which brings the merchandiser to the negotiating table so you can get an
additional advance to make a new deal. (Note this payback right can only be
good for you. If the unrecouped amount is really big, it means something is
seriously wrong and you won’t leave because no one else wants you; if it’s a
small amount, you want the ability to pay them o or renegotiate the deal for
the next tour. For this very reason, this provision is also getting harder to come
by.)

ADVANCE REPAYMENT

As noted above, unlike record and publishing deals, tour merchandise contracts
require repayment of the advance, generally with interest. This is triggered by
things like:
1. The tour doesn’t start on time.
2. You’re disabled or otherwise unable to perform all or part of the tour.
This is based on the same theory as the tour not starting on time, and also
protects them from the possibility that you might not tour for years,
after which the public has forgotten you exist.
3. You don’t play an agreed number of dates. The merchandiser bases their
advance on a forecast of the number of concerts and the size of the
venues. If you decide to chuck the stadiums and play clubs, they won’t
be happy. Or if you cancel dates because tickets aren’t selling, they’ll be
equally unhappy (of course, so will you).
4. If the advance isn’t recouped at the end of the agreed term (for example,
twelve to eighteen months), the company can demand repayment
instead of just extending the term. As a practical matter, if you don’t
have the money, they can’t really get it, but they’ll grumble. And if you
do have the money, they can get quite serious about wanting it back.
When you negotiate these provisions, make sure you don’t have to pay back
more than the unrecouped balance. A lot of deals talk about paying back “the
advance,” which could mean the total amount paid, regardless of what’s
recouped. So be sure your deal isn’t one of those.

EXCLUSIVITY
Tour merchandise deals are of course exclusive, as the merchandiser doesn’t
want anyone else selling stu with your name or face on it. Be sure you exclude
retail sales from this restriction (otherwise, you’ll be in breach of both your
concert merch agreement and your retail sales agreements). You should also
exclude any record company promotions (such as T-shirt or poster giveaways to

promote your album) and any merchandise that your record company has the
right to make (see page 186).
If you have a tour sponsor or you do a commercial, the sponsor sometimes
wants to give away or sell merchandise. For example, they might run a contest
where the prize is a special T-shirt that has your picture and their product logo
on it. In this situation, you have to speci cally deal with this in your
merchandising agreement—and your merchandiser isn’t going to like it very
much. So be extremely careful in giving these rights to a sponsor. The usual
compromise is to limit the amount of merchandise the sponsor can give away in
a speci c city for a number of days before your concert, which is in both your
and the merchandiser’s interest—if the sponsor gives all your fans a T-shirt just
before the show, your concert sales won’t be so hot.

CREATIVE CONTROL
Each of the three merch areas (tour, retail, and D2C) appeals to slightly di erent
fans. And a good merchandiser will guide you to create distinct artwork and
products for each outlet.
Now, speaking of creating products:
You should have the right to approve the design, artwork, photos, drawings,
layout, etc., used in all merchandise, as well as the quality of the goods
themselves. For the most part, merchandising companies give you creative
approval without much of a ght (in stark contrast to the wrestling match you
have with your record company over these same issues).
If you want to use photos as part of your merchandise, you’ll often have to
go to the photographer to get the rights. The same might be true of a graphic
artist who created unique artwork for your album cover, or who designed a
special font, etc. The reason is that, when record companies hire photographers
and graphic artists, they pay only for the minimal rights they need to use the
material in connection with your records. That means the creators keep all the
other rights. Which means you don’t have the right to put their work on your
merchandise.

So you have to go to the photographer/graphic artist and say, “How much?”
The answer is usually a at fee that varies with exactly what kind of rights you
want, and also the stature of the photographer/graphic artist who created the
work. Very rarely, and only for the most superstar of photographers, a
photographer might get a royalty.
It’s essential that you clear the merchandising rights before you use the
materials, or else the photographer/graphic artist will have you in a squeezysqueezy and demand a seriously huge amount of money. By asking early, if you
nd out the rights aren’t available at a reasonable price, you can use something
else.
If you have a federally registered service mark for your name (see page 379
for what that is), you need to approve the merchandise quality in order to
preserve your mark’s legal status. In this case, you should also make sure the
merchandiser puts your ® symbol on the goods. Even if you haven’t registered
your mark, however, you should still insist on approving quality to make sure
your image isn’t tacked on to a piece of sharp cheddar.
Your merchandiser will pay the cost of creating artwork for your merch
(called origination costs), but this cost is treated as an additional advance, and
therefore comes out of your share of net pro ts, or out of your royalty. If you
have some clout, you may be able to treat origination costs as an expense that’s
deducted in computing net pro ts, meaning you only pay a portion of it. But
there’s usually a cap on what they’ll pay on this basis, and anything over the cap
comes 100% out of your money. For this reason, you should have approval over
what they spend, at least for amounts that go over the cap.
If they agree to deduct origination costs o the top, it will be for tour merch
only; they’ll charge the entire cost against your royalties for D2C and retail.
Especially if all the origination costs are charged to you, you should own all
the artwork and be able to use it after the term of your merch deal. And even if
it’s o the top, you should try to get these rights. If you have some clout, you
can pull it o .

EXCLUSIONS

Try to exclude festival merchandise if it includes all the artists, not just you. You
will likely have to give those rights to a festival if you perform there.
Also, some artists try to exclude digital merch, so they can make those deals
directly. But the merchandisers ght hard to keep those rights.

SELL-OFF RIGHTS
At the end of the term, the merchandiser wants the right to sell o any
remaining merchandise, usually for a period of six months. They should have
no right to manufacture after the term, only to sell whatever is on hand. The
merchandiser will ask for the right to sell your tour merch through wholesale
(meaning retail) outlets and D2C, which is reasonable since there won’t be any
more concerts. You get a royalty for these sales, which is the same as if they were
sold under a retail or D2C deal (we’ll talk about those on pages 432 and 434).
The sell-o period should be nonexclusive, because your new merchandiser
will be getting into the market at the same time.
You can add a provision that gives you the right to buy the inventory at cost
plus 5% to 15% at the end of the term, in which case there would be no sell-o
rights. You would then give the goods to your new merchandiser, and in fact
you’ll get your new merchandiser to put up the money to buy it. Of course,
you’ll only do this if you’re con dent you can sell the stu .
Assuming you’re not going to buy the goods, and the merchandiser has a
sell-o period, here are some other things to ask for (which are very similar to
the sell-o rights under print music deals that we discussed on page 275):
1. Your contract should say the merchandiser can’t stockpile goods. This
means it can’t manufacture a ton of goods right before the end, so that it
has a lot of leftovers to sell. Speci cally, get language that restricts their
manufacturing to “only such quantity of goods as is necessary to meet
reasonably anticipated sales requirements.”
2. Your merchandiser can’t do distress sales, meaning they can’t sell your
goods at super-low prices just to get rid of them. (This practice is also
called dumping.) Otherwise you’ll be adorning a lot of 99¢ Store

shoppers and swap-meet fans. It also perturbs your new merchandiser,
who’s trying to sell your merch at full price. However, this has become
extremely hard to get over the years, as merchandisers’ pro ts have been
squeezed, and their tolerance for dining on leftover goods has been
stretched to the regurgitation point.
3. At the end of the sell-o period, they should again o er you the
remaining merchandise at their cost plus 5% to 15%. If you decide not to
buy it, they should have to destroy it, or else donate it to a charity.

BOOTLEGGERS
Merchandisers want the right, and you should encourage them, to chase
bootleggers. The term bootlegger was coined in the 1890s, because people
illegally sold booze to Native Americans by smuggling bottles onto the
reservations in the legs of their boots. During Prohibition, it came to mean
anyone who illegally sold booze.
A modern-day equivalent of these ne citizens are people who, without any
authority, manufacture merchandise with your name and/or likeness on it and
sell it outside the venues. Legitimate merchandisers are always inside the facility;
bootleggers are the guys who hit fans on the street or in the parking lot. (One of
their tricks is to hire college students for the night, so the vendors look
wholesome, clean-cut, and somewhat innocent, while the bootleggers
themselves stay out of sight.) Not only are these people costing you money
because you don’t get paid for the merchandise, but their goods are usually of
inferior quality. And guess who gets the complaint letters when some
Tuscaloosa fan’s T-shirt shrinks to t her Barbie doll?
The legitimate merchandisers have been relatively successful in dealing with
these pieces of slime, and have found that in some cases they are large,
sophisticated operations (one even owned its own T-shirt factory). Through
means I’m not free to tell you, the merchandisers have been able to track the
bootleggers down and get the courts to stop them. (The laws outside the U.S.
aren’t always so hospitable, by the way.)

The merchandisers will ask you to pay part of the money to chase the pirates,
but if you have some clout, they’ll front it and charge it back to you, either out
of any money recovered from the bootlegger and/or from your other royalties.
You can also do your part in this game of hide-and-seek. Use your social
media to post pictures of o cial merchandise, and let your fans know that the
pirated stu is really shoddy. Also, educate them that they shouldn’t buy
anything outside the venue.

25
Retail, Direct to Consumer (D2C)
Merchandising, and Fan Clubs

RETAIL MERCHANDISING
Retail merchandising means, as the name implies, selling merchandise
through retail stores (Hot Topic, Zumiez, Urban Out tters, Walmart, H&M,
Zara, Gucci, etc.) and their websites. It can be a signi cant way for an artist to
make money.
Don’t take it personally, but not all artists have retail sales appeal. You have
to be pretty high-pro le before stores will give your merch any of their oor
space; if a pair of yoga pants will sell better than you, you’re out. But when you
get big enough to be loved by the mall stores and mass-market stores (Walmart,
Target, Gap, Taco Bell—maybe not the last one), you can get into six- or sevengure retail merch money per year.
So how do you get your goods from the oven to a retail rack? You make a
deal with a retail merchandise company, who creates the products and sells them
to the retail stores. For certain types of goods, rather than manufacturing and
shipping the product themselves, a merchandiser licenses your merch rights to
other companies who specialize in a particular niche. In other words, they (a)
give another company the right to make a product with your approved photo,
imagery, likeness, or logo, (b) get paid by that company for the merch they sell,
and (c) split the money with you. This is called a sublicense, because the merch

company rst licenses the name and likeness rights from you, then under that
license (sub that license, meaning “under it,” like a submarine) re-licenses those
rights to someone else. Many of these deals are in small areas (such as stickers,
belt buckles, patches, trading cards, condoms, etc.), but some can be really big,
such as liquor or slot machines.
Digital merch (as discussed on page 186) is today licensed to the gaming
company, who pays a royalty if the rights weren’t bought out. So they’d fall
under this category.
As you move further into the superstar realm, you may want to exclude
sublicensing rights from the merchandiser and make some of these deals
directly. However, entering into a lot of small licensing agreements is best
described as a “pain in the ass for little money,” so paying this percentage for
your merchandiser to handle it is usually worth it. It’s more worthwhile to do it
yourself for the really big deals (like liquor or slot machines), but if the
merchandiser delivers you a major opportunity, and uses their expertise to
maximize it, they bring value to the table.
By the way, a lot of these deals can be on the tacky side. And since they don’t
generate much money, a number of artists don’t do them at all. No reason to
risk damaging your cachet for peanuts. So make sure you have approval of all
sublicenses.
Got all that? Good… I got this snow globe opportunity for you that’s gonna
be huge. Picture a little statue of yourself inside this glass ball with gold glitter…

ROYALTIES
The royalties for retail merch are generally in the following range. Unlike tour
deals, they’re not a share of pro ts.
1. United States retail sales: 20% to 30% of the wholesale price for topline/specialty retailers, depending on bargaining power. So, for example,
if you have a 20% royalty and there’s a $10 wholesale price, you get
$2.00 per unit, regardless of the cost of the goods, shipping, and all the
other expenses.

For the midlevel stores (Macy’s, Kohls, JCPenney, etc.) you’ll get 75%
of these rates (15% to 22.5%), and for mass-marketers (Kmart, Walmart,
Target) you’ll get 50% (10% to 15%). The reason for lower royalties is
simple: Stores that push out tons of merchandise have a lot of clout, and
they beat up the merchandiser to give them lower prices (which means
there’s less pro t for the merchandiser, so they can’t a ord to pay a full
royalty). It’s just like that great schoolyard tradition: He who gets beaten
up by the bully turns around and beats up the next-smaller person.
2. Foreign sales: Roughly 80% of the U.S. rates.
3. Sublicenses: 75% to 85% of the merchandiser’s receipts from
sublicenses.

OTHER DEAL POINTS
Other than the royalty calculations, when you make a retail merchandise deal,
most of the considerations are exactly the same as tour merchandising deals,
such as:
1. Approval of the merchandise items
2. Approval of your likeness
3. Approval of the designs and layout
4. Approval of sublicenses.
5. Restrictions on sell-o rights
6. Right to purchase merchandise at the end
Cross-collateralization. If your retail agreement is with the same company
that has your tour merchandise (which it almost always is), you have to deal
with whether the advance under the tour agreement is cross-collateralized with
the retail deal (and vice versa). (For a discussion of cross-collateralization, see
page 89.) Cross-collateralization is never good for you, but it usually means you
get a bigger advance because the merchandiser is spreading their risk. So allow
cross-collateralizing only if they o er you a humongous amount of money that
you can’t get any other way.

DIRECT TO CONSUMER (D2C) (E-COMMERCE/WEB
STORE SALES)
As we discussed, D2C (meaning Direct to Consumer, and which is also
known as E-Commerce and Web Store Sales) means selling merch through
your o cial Web store (on your website), fan club, and via links to your social
media. D2C started with wearable goods (T-shirts, hats, etc.) but has grown to
include things like concert tickets, VIP experiences (see page 406 for what those
are). If you’re big enough, D2C sales can exceed tour or retail earnings, but to
make that happen, you need a good merch partner to set up and execute all this.
In the beginning, you can do your own D2C by manufacturing your
merchandise and hiring someone to take the online orders, collect the money,
and ship the goods. There are companies who do this for a percentage. As you
move up, however, your volume will get too big and you’ll need a
merchandising company to take it over. In part this is because you need
someone to handle the larger volume, but even more importantly, it’s to get
their expertise in designing and marketing product for D2C. For example, a
good merchandiser knows how to analyze fan data to design merchandise that
can maximize your sales.
When you license your D2C rights to a merchandiser, the U.S. royalty rates
are in the range of 25% to 35% (foreign royalties are about 80% of those). Note
this is higher than the 20% to 30% royalty we discussed for retail merchandise in
the last section, and even more important, your D2C royalty rate is applied to
the retail (selling) price of the goods (less sales tax, shipping, credit card fees, and
the like), as opposed to retail merchandise royalties which are applied to the
wholesale price. Since the retail price is obviously higher than wholesale, you
can quickly see that you’re getting much more money per unit on D2C than
you are on retail (a higher percentage applied against a higher price).
Merchandisers can a ord to do this because they’re the actual retailer who’s
selling directly to the public—meaning there’s no store taking a pro t in
between the merchandiser and the fan. In fact, in D2C, there’s no wholesale
price at all—just the price to the consumer. So the merchandiser gets more
money, and you get a bigger piece.

Another plus for D2C is that, when your merch is sold by a retailer or on
tour, you have no idea who bought it. With D2C, when a fan buys something
on your Web store, you know their name, email, and address. That also means
you can contact them in the future and can keep them engaged with your
career by feeding them information. And pitch them to buy more merchandise,
tickets, VIP packages, etc.
To your fans, the Web store looks like it’s run by you because the
merchandiser invisibly handles the back end (taking orders, collecting money,
shipping, etc.). This is very cool, but it also means that it’s your image on the
front line with your audience. Fans who spend money on your Web store are
likely your most die-hard fans, and you don’t want to upset them if something
goes wrong and it’s not xed right away. If someone orders a kiddy T-shirt and
gets a bumper sticker that says “Lick My Carburetor,” it’s not the merchandise
company’s name that’ll be in the angry tweets. So it’s critical to have a solid
company running the machinery behind the curtain.
We talked about bootleggers at concerts, and I suspect you won’t be shocked
to hear they’re even more alive and well online. These sleazes sell phony goods
on the auction sites, as well as a few places that specialize in knocko goods. So
be sure your D2C merchandiser has the resources to ght these scuzzbuckets.
As to the deal, all the merchandising points we previously covered (artwork,
approvals, sell-o , etc.) apply to D2C as well.

FAN CLUBS
Fan clubs are still around, but they’re far less meaningful than they were in the
past. And they’re dwindling.
Here’s why.
The purpose of fan clubs is to develop a community of your most loyal fans,
so you can talk directly to them. In the dark days before the Internet, the only
way to communicate with your fans was to go on radio or TV, or do interviews
in magazines and newspapers. So fan clubs started as a way to create an “insider”
experience for the most loyal fans. These fans sent in their dues by mail, got
back a membership card to impress their friends, and also got exclusive content

during the year (a newsletter, photos, information about the artist that wasn’t
yet public, etc.). And the artist made money on the fan club because of the
membership fees.
Today, artists are constantly talking to their fans over social media, and every
major event is immediately spread all over the Web. So the fan club experience
of directly communicating with your peeps is so… 1980s. The only stu a fan
club can now o er is things like early access to tickets, or maybe streaming a
record ahead of release, or a chance to win an exclusive experience with the
artist. And even then, to make a fan club really viable, artists have to commit
some serious time to creating exclusive content for the club. Most artists no
longer bother to do that, since their fans are already getting real-time
communication every time the artist goes to the grocery store.
For these reasons, I’m told only about 15% of artists have a fan club these
days, and a good number of those are free to join. The reason a lot of artists
stopped asking for membership fees is that they decided it’s more important to
build a database of fans than it is to charge dues. The ones who still require
members to pay fees are usually major live performers who incentivize fans to
join by giving them early access to tickets.
Even if fan club membership is free, you can still make money through the
club by selling tickets or merchandise, especially if it’s stu you can only get if
you’re a member. If you’re selling merchandise, your share is the D2C royalty
we just discussed. For tickets, as we discussed on page 392, artists can get the
right to sell a certain number of tickets through their fan club, and most
merchandisers are set up to handle the ticket sales for you (just like D2C merch,
it looks like the fan club is selling the tickets, but it’s really the merchandiser in
the back room doing the heavy lifting). Their deal is to add a fee per ticket
(usually a few bucks) on top of the face value, which compensates them for
handling the sales.

CAUTION
Before you tackle the rest of the book, be sure you have a pretty good
understanding of record and publishing basics in Chapters 7, 8, 15, 16, and 18.

If you skipped ahead and don’t already know this stu , I suggest you go back.
Even if you’re reading straight through, you might want to review those
chapters quickly. The areas we’re about to discuss are a bit complex and you
need a solid grasp of the basics before attempting them.
Okay. Ready? Keep your arms and legs inside the car at all times.
If you’re on the Fast Track or Advanced Overview and you’re interested in
Classical Music, go to Chapter 26 on page 441.
If Classical music puts you to sleep, saunter on over to Motion Picture Music in
Chapter 27 on page 451.
If you answered “None of the above,” Fast Track to the Conclusion on page 511.

PART VII

Classical Music

26
Classical Music

I shall now tap my baton on the music stand to politely engage your attention,
as we move into the world of classical music. Please silence your mobile phones,
do not applaud between movements, and speak only in quiet, melli uous tones
for the duration of this chapter.
The major labels, and a few larger independent classical labels, still do deals
on the same basis as all other kinds of music, meaning the structure of a royalty,
advance, etc., that we’ve already discussed. However, as you’ll see, the numbers
are lower. Much lower. (The only exceptions to these lower numbers are
crossover artists like Andrea Bocelli (crossover meaning their appeal extends
beyond the classical market to other genres). Those deals are virtually identical
to the contracts we’ve discussed for pop artists).
All in all, apart from the crossovers, the economics of classical music (to use a
re ned term) “suck.” For example, the cost of recording a full orchestra can run
$150,000 to $400,000, and typical album sales (including streaming equivalent
numbers) are in the 5,000 to 15,000 unit range worldwide (remember, the sales
levels we discussed in the earlier chapters for mainstream artists are only for the
United States). In fact, a “big seller” classical album would be 50,000
worldwide. And those sales are mostly streaming equivalents—downloads are
virtually dead, CDs are meaningful in a few territories (primarily Japan and
Germany, but not the U.S.), and vinyl is making a bit of a comeback, but it’s all
tiny sh.

By the way, the recording costs I just gave you are typical for studio albums
in the United States, where it’s particularly expensive to record classical. That’s
because the AFM sets minimums for recording the musicians that make it far
more expensive to record here than in Europe (at least other than the United
Kingdom), where the unions aren’t as involved in recording. However, live
albums have recently gotten much cheaper in the United States, due to a new
AFM union agreement that swapped a lower up-front fee (about 20% of the
union fees for a studio album) for a big piece of the income. Speci cally, if the
orchestra owns the recording and enters into a distribution deal, the union gets
55% of the recordings’ gross receipts.
But even with the union’s concession, if you do the math, and throw in
some marketing dollars, a traditional classical music recording can’t make any
money. And in case that’s not bad enough, classical is also disadvantaged in the
streaming age. That’s because streaming revenue is divided based on the
number of plays, and a twenty-minute classical piece counts as one play.
Perhaps this will change in the future, but as yet there are no signs of it. Also, as
we discussed on page 221, publishers get more for streaming long songs, but
most classical music is in the public domain, and this formula doesn’t apply to
recordings (only to the songs in the recordings). So for the moment, classical is
like your pimply cousin that folks don’t notice is missing from dinner until
twenty minutes after the meal starts.
Because of all this, classical record deals have changed to a world where the
label is more of a collaborator and distributor than a nancier. In other words,
the labels pay little or nothing for the albums, but rather just agree to distribute
and market them. Meaning the artist has to nd their own funding (more about
that in a minute), deliver a nished album, and then license the rights to the
label for distribution (usually for a term of ten years or so). In exchange, the
labels often don’t pay royalties; they just give the artist a at fee of a few
thousand dollars, which is less than the recording costs. And if that’s not funky
enough for you, the labels sometimes make the artist buy a minimum number
of units (in the range of 500 to 1,500) to o set their risk.
If there is a royalty, it’s in the range of 20% to 30%, which sounds high,
except that it’s computed very di erently from the artist royalties for

mainstream folks. Instead of the royalty being a percentage of PPD (see page 83
for what that means), it’s a percentage of the record company’s receipts,
meaning what they get from the distributor (in other words, the PPD minus a
distribution fee).
More and more, this structure is becoming the norm even in cases where the
label pays the recording costs.
So if the labels aren’t paying recording costs, and the sales can never recoup
recording costs, how do classical albums ever get made? Why would anyone
even want to make one?
First, how do they get made? The most common answer may surprise you:
Rich donors.
The major orchestras are all nonpro t organizations, who are supported by
charitable donations. And they use some of that money to record albums.
But why? Who puts money into a deal where they can’t ever make it back?
Are they idiots?
No, they’re not stupid (well, there’s this one bassoon player…)
Orchestras know they can’t make money from the albums, but they see
records as marketing tools that build the orchestra’s pro le by showcasing them
as recording artists.
So that’s most of the biz these days—loss leaders. And indeed, because it’s
only a marketing tool, a number of orchestras (for example, the London
Symphony Orchestra, the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, and the Seattle
Symphony Orchestra) simply make distribution deals (similar to what we
discussed on page 202), with a distribution fee of about 15%. In these cases, they
do their own manufacturing, marketing, and promotion, and brand it as their
own label. Or sometimes they’ll do a hybrid deal, where the orchestra pays the
recording costs, but the label pays for physical manufacturing, and shares
marketing and promotion, in which case there’s a 50/50 pro t split.
Now let’s cleanse our palate with a little amuse-bouche—the other terms of a
classical record contract.

TERM AND PRODUCT
Because classical artists don’t generally compose the material they record, and
because their recordings are in essence “live performances,” they can make
records much faster than pop artists. Also, since the compositions already exist,
the recordings can be planned very far in advance, which is not practical in the
pop world. So for both of these reasons, classical artists can record several
albums per year.
Historically, classical deals would commit the company and artist to record
two or three albums per year, and the term of the deal would be for several
years, rm. However, as the classical market shriveled, and costs continued to
rise, multi-album commitments dropped o radically and are rare these days
unless you’re a very signi cant artist. Instead, similar to pop deals, the record
company commits to one album at a time, with options for more. And
nowadays, the companies don’t even want more than one album per year. They
don’t think the market can handle more than that without cannibalizing an
earlier release.
Historically, classical deals had the same exclusivity provisions as pop deals,
but as the labels committed to less and less product, the artists pushed back on
the exclusivity. Ideally, there’s no exclusivity for anything other than audio-only
records. But even if the exclusivity is broader, they will (if you ask) carve out
broadcasts and simulcasts. Catch-up streaming (meaning a stream of an earlier
live broadcast, usually on the broadcaster’s site) can sometimes get carved out,
but often the record companies won’t agree to this up front. Instead, the artist
and label just work it out on a case-by-case basis.
During the pandemic, without live performances, orchestras created
audiovisual streaming products to stay in touch with their audiences, and this
has continued as a practice. These concerts are available through major
orchestra websites, concert halls, festival promoters, and opera houses, and can
sometimes be part of a festival. The orchestras either operate the streaming
platforms themselves, or they have ongoing partnerships with platforms,
production companies, or TV stations to keep up a stream of content.

These live streams and videos on demand have now become a major part of
the classical music biz. However, if your record company has exclusive rights to
your performances, you can’t deliver audiovisual rights to a third-party
streamer. On the other hand, the concert producer won’t let you perform
unless you can deliver audiovisual rights for video on demand, TV, theatrical,
downloads, and physical (though DVDs and downloads aren’t much of an issue
these days). (Note this is only about audiovisual rights; the concert producers
know they can’t get audio only rights.)
So you’re caught between the label and the concert producer. How do you
get out of this one?
Short answer: You can’t.
You have to involve your label before you can make these deals. And
“involve” means they have to consent and get paid for letting you do this. The
payment is either a at fee and/or allowing the label to use excerpts from the
production on their social to promote you. Your label will also limit how long
the producer can stream the product (sometimes a short window, but not more
than a year). Sometimes the labels want to exploit the production itself beyond
the producer’s platform, perhaps sharing the income with the platform, but this
is not common.
In the big picture view, given how little money comes from records, and
how record deals interfere with your granting audiovisual rights to third parties,
classical artists are questioning whether they want an exclusive deal. If artists
decide these deals aren’t necessary, it will be a serious challenge to the labels’
business models. And I wouldn’t be surprised if future deals only use labels as
non-exclusive distributors.

ROYALTIES
If you have a royalty deal (as opposed to the distribution license we already
discussed), you won’t be surprised to hear that royalties in the classical world are
also lower. The good news, however, is that you’re paid on every record sold,
meaning the company eats any of the recording costs it may have paid. In other
words, the only thing recouped is the advance you put in your pocket. As

you’ve seen, this is radically di erent from the pop world, where the company
will recoup anything that crawls. (Remember, in this section, we’re talking
about a traditional classical deal, not crossover artists. Crossover artist deals
recoup recording costs just like pop artists.)
How much lower are classical royalties? A typical deal is in the range of 7.5%
to 10% (see page 94 for the range of pop music royalties). However, classical
artists’ royalties aren’t “all-in” (see page 97), which means you aren’t responsible
for a producer, and thus you keep all the royalties (though you often have to
share them, as noted in the next paragraph).
Classical albums are frequently an amalgamation of several artists. For
example, Yo-Yo Ma plays with the Boston Pops, and Gustavo Dudamel
conducts. Since important guest soloists like Yo-Yo get a royalty, and so do
major conductors, and so do successful orchestras, the royalties are spread
around. In fact, it’s sometimes di cult to tell whose album it is. For the one I
just described, is it a Yo-Yo, Boston Pops, or Gustavo album?
Just like guest artist recordings on the pop side (see page 152 for what those
are), the royalties are allocated among the participants in an agreed proportion.
While there’s no hard-and-fast rule, a principal soloist might get 4% to 8%, a
conductor 3% to 5% (if there’s even a conductor royalty; often the conductor
just gets a at fee and no royalty), a guest soloist 2% to 3% (if not a at fee), and a
well-known orchestra 2% to 4%.

ADVANCES
Because classical releases sell far less units than a typical pop release (or at least far
less than what the pop company hopes to sell), advances even for the superstars
are much smaller, typically in the range of $5,000 to $10,000 per album. If an
artist has “marquee value,” meaning that his or her name is recognizable (e.g.,
Yo-Yo Ma, Plácido Domingo, John Williams, etc.), the advance is generally
from $15,000 to $50,000.
The size of an advance also depends on:

1. The extent you participate in the recording. If you’re only guesting, for
example, your advance will be lower than if you’re the principal soloist.
2. The expense of the recording. If you’re the principal piano soloist on a
recording, for example, you’ll get a lower advance for an orchestral
recording (which is expensive) than you will for a recording of piano
solo works (where they just set up a microphone and drop a few bucks in
your brandy snifter).
3. And lastly, your advance depends on that common denominator of all
business: clout.

MECHANICAL ROYALTIES
Much of classical music is in the public domain, which means there are no
mechanical royalties paid for the music (see page 323 for an explanation of
public domain, and page 219 for a discussion of mechanical royalties).
However, some of the compositions may be more recent, or even
contemporary, and the record company has to pay mechanicals to the publishers
of these works. Also, as we discussed, arrangements of public domain works are
copyrightable if they have enough originality, and these also bear mechanical
royalties.
When a company has to pay mechanical royalties, there is usually a reduction
of your royalty. You’re typically charged about half of the burden, although this
is negotiable, and it’s not always as simple as I’ve just stated. For example,
sometimes the contract just says that your royalty rate goes down a point or two
if the company has to pay mechanicals. By an amazing coincidence, this also
results in your eating about half of the mechanicals.
As streaming is now a major part of the business, remember that the digital
service providers pay the mechanicals rather than the company. So be sure that
your label doesn’t reduce your royalty for mechanicals they don’t pay.

MARKETING TIE-INS

Because of the limited sales potential of classical recordings, the companies look
for alternative ways to market their albums. And marketing is particularly
important for big artists who make expensive recordings. The reason isn’t just
the higher investment—it’s because most classical compositions have been
recorded many times before, by many other artists, so there’s a need to convince
buyers that this new recording is a “must-have.”
One of the most powerful marketing tools is for you to appear in a public
television special, or perform a concert tour, open a car dealership, etc. If you
have some clout, you can get the label to commit money to these ventures, but
it would be minimal given their small pro t margin. And while TV shows
de nitely help sell records, they’re very expensive—public television only pays
$50,000 to $100,000 for their programs, and the costs can easily run $500,000
to $700,000 or more. You might get some money back from artsy places like
NHK in Japan, or Arte in Germany, but not enough to cover the costs of
recording the video. So this is only feasible for high-pro le orchestras that can
self- nance (alone or with the label’s help), or individual artists whose labels will
pick up the costs to drive visibility and album sales. But as the market shrinks,
record company contributions are shriveling with it.
If you’re on the Fast Track, and you’re interested in Motion Picture Music, keep
reading.
Otherwise, Fast Track to the Conclusion on page 511.

PART VIII

Motion Picture Music

27
Overview of Motion Picture Music

Congratulations! You are now in graduate school. To understand music in
lms, you need a complete knowledge of the music business (records,
copyrights, and publishing), as well as a knowledge of the lm business. I
couldn’t have put this chapter earlier, because you wouldn’t have been ready
for it. But now you are, so let’s go.

INTRODUCTION
I have seen music screw up more motion pictures than bad directors. This is
because music is a stepchild in movies. Music budgets are small in comparison
to the budget of the lm, and as you’ll see, putting music in lms is really
complicated. It’s normally left until the last minute, at which point there’s a
massive panic and very little time to get it together. Often this is for a good
reason—it may not be possible to record the music until the studio knows
exactly what the picture looks like—but many times it’s simply a matter of
neglect. As music supervisors have become more important in the industry
(more about them later), this seems to have changed (a little). However, there
are always panicked emergencies, no matter what.

ONE SONG—EIGHT DEALS

One of the main di culties is that lm people, by and large, don’t fully
understand music (not that they should—their expertise is in making lms).
And it doesn’t help that lm music is a twisted tangle of Gordian knots. For
example, for every song going into a lm, there are always deals to be made with
at least three, and often up to eight, di erent folk:
1. The performer (singer/instrumentalist)
2. The record company to whom the performer is signed
3. The record producer
4. The songwriter
5. The publisher to whom the songwriter is signed
6. The owner of a recording that’s being licensed into the lm or sampled
in a song
7. The publisher who owns a song that’s being sampled
8. The record company putting out the soundtrack album
If you have several songwriters signed to di erent publishers, several
performers signed to di erent record companies, and a number of samples, you
can easily get up to fteen or twenty deals for just one song.
Now if any of these balls drop while you’re juggling, or if any of the rights
under one agreement don’t match those required by another, the song may
have to be trashed. And lm producers on a tight delivery schedule with a
multimillion-dollar lm at stake don’t like to be told that a song is holding up
their picture (would you?).
For all these reasons, the music supervisors/business a airs
execs/lawyers/studio executives in charge of lm music have extraordinarily
di cult jobs. If they deliver the music and pull o a minor miracle by
balancing all the competing interests, it was expected and they’re lucky to get a
thanks. However, if something goes wrong and the lm producer can’t use the
song, they’re the villains. Wanna sign up?
So clearing music for lms (as we say in Texas) is like being a one-legged man
in an ass-kicking contest. But it’s fun and satisfying when it works, and if you’re
strong of heart, come along and I’ll show you this side of the business.

THE RIGHTS INVOLVED
Film music rights fall into two categories:
Acquisition of rights for the picture. These are deals to put music in the
lm, meaning deals with:
1. Performing artists.
2. Songwriters and composers.
3. Record producers.
4. Record companies, for the right to (a) use existing recordings or samples,
and/or (b) allow one of their exclusive recording artists to create
something new for the lm.
5. Publishers, for the right to (a) license an existing song into the lm, (b)
interpolate an existing song into a new song or the score, or (c) allow one
or more of their writers to compose songs for the lm company.
Licenses of rights from the picture company to others. Once the lm
company acquires the music rights, it makes deals to license that music to other
people. Speci cally:
1. A deal with a record company to release a soundtrack album.
2. Licensing lm clips for music videos.
3. Possibly a publishing administration deal.
4. Possibly a co-promotion deal (something that promotes both the lm
and a product; see page 457 for what those are).
Okay, that’s a map of the landscape. Let’s go visit the major sites.

28
Performer Deals

OVERVIEW
The deal for an artist to record a song for a lm has two distinct parts. One is to
use the recording in the picture itself (which is pretty straightforward), and the
other is to use the recording on a soundtrack album and/or single (which can be
horrendous).

PERFORMANCE IN THE FILM (NO RECORD
RIGHTS)
The deal for an artist to record a song for a picture is usually a at fee. No muss,
no fuss, no complications. Well, maybe one gigantic complication…
Remember, as we discussed on page 174, most record deals say that the
record company owns all “recordings” made during the term, and that language
is broad enough to include lms. Also, the de nition of “records” in every
record deal includes electronic transmissions (understandably, since the world
has moved to streaming), which means streaming the lm also falls under their
exclusivity. So performing a song in a lm requires the record company’s
consent, and your label becomes a cozy partner in these deals (meaning they’ll
be wanting a nice chunk of the fee). Often they’ll want all of the fee
(particularly if you aren’t recouped), but will graciously apply half of that fee

against your account. However, this is negotiable—meaning you might get
some of the fee paid through to you.
Since you can’t make this deal without the record company’s consent, you
have to involve them as soon as a proposal comes up. So, before you even start
negotiating, you must clear the deal with your record company. In case
you didn’t hear me, BEFORE you start negotiating, you must clear the deal
with your record company. Did I say “clear”? Was I “clear”?
And in addition to the record company, if you’re writing the song, your
publisher will have to license the rights to use it in the lm. So you also need
them on board at the beginning.
Today, the major lm companies have been stung enough to make sure the
artist’s record company and publisher have blessed the deal. But minor and
independent lm companies may not be so careful, and in the rush of the
moment, anyone can slip in a puddle of oops. In addition, there are sometimes
missed signals and miscommunications on both sides. For example, a director
may have a relationship with an artist, and they get each other all excited and
pledge their eternal love without realizing other folks need to come to the party.
Or a manager might think he’s cleared the rights with the record company, and
indeed he has (sort of). For example, he may have discussed it with the company,
and the company said it “sounds okay.” That seems pretty good, but the record
company may have only meant their approval was subject to working out a deal
to compensate them, while the manager believed he was free to go. So the moral
is: Have the lm company talk directly to the record company.
Of course, if your record deal has a built-in exclusion for soundtracks (see
page 174), you don’t have to worry about this. But most of the time it doesn’t.
And even if you have an exclusion, you may not want to use it for this lm. (If
the record company agrees to a particular soundtrack, you might want to save
the exclusion for a time when they don’t.) Or you may have already used the
exclusion—the exclusion may only allow one cut every album cycle or so, and
there may be a second lm you want to do. Or the lm company may require
more rights than your exclusion allows. So be sure everyone knows what
everyone else is doing.

And even if you have that exclusion in your record deal, your publisher will
have to be involved if you write the song.

Fees
The artist’s fee for the lm can range anywhere from union scale (see page 88
for what that is) up to $1 million plus for a major artist. The norm is about
$5,000 to $10,000 for a minor artist, escalating to somewhere around $15,000
to $25,000 for a midlevel artist. Superstars tend to be in the $250,000 to
$750,000 range, with some occasionally going higher if the lm company is hot
for them and the star is playing hard to get. Title songs (songs played over the
opening or closing credits) pay better than background music.
Featured instrumentalists (for example, a solo violinist playing over the titles)
get fees in the range of $10,000 to $20,000 for lesser-knowns, and sometimes as
high as $100,000 for big names.
Sometimes lms use specialty vocalists the same way that featured
instrumentalists are used—sort of like being a “vocal instrumental.” Usually it’s
someone well known in their particular genre, like opera, Native American
chanting, fraternity songs, etc. These folks usually get a fee of about $10,000 or
so per track, though it can go higher if they’re well known and their vocal
increases awareness of the lm.
If your fee is at the high end of this range, all or a portion of it will often be
treated as an advance against your royalties (we’ll discuss soundtrack record
royalties in a minute).

All-in Deals
Some artists prefer to negotiate an all-in fee deal with the lm company, which
is the same concept as the recording fund we discussed in connection with
record deals. For example, for a total of $75,000, they’ll record and deliver a
completed track. In this case, the artist pays the recording costs out of the
$75,000 and keeps the di erence as a fee.

Unless the fee is extraordinarily high, and the artist produces himself or
herself, I generally don’t like this. Directors are fussy about what goes into their
lms, and you don’t want to be in the position of having to re-record the track
several times at your expense. Also, if the artist isn’t the producer of the
recording, you have to pay out a producer’s fee, which can be an unknown
variable. I much prefer just having the artist show up, sing, and leave.
On the other hand, if you’re fully self-contained (like an EDM artist who
produces yourself and can do the track on your laptop), your costs are minimal
and most of the fee goes straight into your pocket. In this case, to the extent you
can treat most of the fee as “recording costs,” your label won’t share in that part
of it (Shhh… don’t tell them).

Rights Granted
If the lm company wants to use your song in advertising and marketing the
lm, the rst question of course is whether you want that to happen. Your
record company will also have an opinion on this, depending on what else
they’re promoting at the time. For example, if you have a big song out at the
same time, they may not want another of your songs in ads for the lm. On the
other hand, where the lm looks to be massive, so that having your song
associated with it will help both the song and your career, you’d de nitely want
them to use your song in advertising and marketing. Always great to have
someone spend millions of dollars to pump your music into people’s ears.
As to rights, you ideally don’t want to give the lm company any more than
the right to use your recording (a) in the lm, (b) in the marketing of the lm (if
that’s part of the deal), (c) on the soundtrack album, and (d) on a single. This
means you’re excluding things like licenses for commercials, licenses for other
lms, etc. If you’re able to keep non- lm related rights, the usual lm studio
restriction is that you can’t issue a synchronization license for the recording
(meaning you can’t license the recording to another lm or television show, or a
commercial) for a number of years, if not forever. The theory is that they don’t
want someone else getting the goodwill of a song closely identi ed with their
picture.

Many lm companies require the right to use your recording in sequels
( lms that start where the last one left o ), prequels ( lms that take place in
time before the lm for which the song is licensed), remakes (a new version of
the same movie), spin-o s ( lms with some of the same characters in di erent
adventures), advertising, trailers, co-promotions (see the next paragraph),
and out-of-context uses (page 254). Over the last several years, lm companies
have radically expanded this list of things they can do with your song, all
without paying you: studio tours, theme parks, live entertainment (like
Broadway shows, ice shows, etc.), storyteller and sing-along records, a TV series
based on the lm, lm-themed video games, merchandising, outtakes (scenes
deleted from the lm), making-ofs (behind-the-scenes footage of lming),
toaster ovens (just seeing if you’re paying attention), and whatever else they can
throw in the soup.
You usually have to give up these rights, but with some clout, you can get
more money for them—either by increasing your original fee, or getting
additional monies if the song is used in one of these categories. If they agree to
pay more, it’ll either be a pre-negotiated amount listed in the contract, or a
requirement for them to pay you a “customary fee” that you can argue about
later. Go for the customary fee if you can; any fees they list today could be really
low by the time you actually get there.
Another issue is co-promotions. That’s where the lm company ties into an
advertiser (such as McDonald’s; Burger King; Morty’s Rod, Reel, and Worms;
etc.). These folks do things like hype the lm in their advertising, give away
plastic cups and toys to promote the movie, hang posters in their stores, write
the lm’s name on their bathroom walls, etc. As part of this package, the lm
company will want to use your recording in radio and TV commercials that
promote both the advertiser and the lm, and that’s a source of negotiation.
You may well object to having your voice on a commercial for something
besides the lm—certainly without getting paid, and maybe altogether if it’s
inconsistent with your image. Also, if you’re a superstar, the right to use your
voice in a commercial is a serious exploitation of your persona.
This is usually resolved by bludgeoning you into submission, since the lm
companies ght hard for these rights—co-promotions can mean millions in

advertising for the lm. If you have a lot of clout, you may be able to get a
prenegotiated additional payment, or even prohibit some or all co-promotions
without your consent (which means you can make a deal later, if you’re willing
to allow it, but otherwise they can’t do it). Another compromise is to limit how
the song is used in the co-promotion (for example, it can only be used to
promote the lm itself, not to promote the product). You may also be able to
get category restrictions for co-promotions, though they usually give you things
that wouldn’t likely sponsor the lm anyway, like tobacco or rearms. Or if you
have an existing sponsor relationship—for example, Pepsi won’t be happy if you
have a deal to endorse them and the lm company uses your recording in a copromotion with Coke. Alcohol may be an issue if the lm wants to go after that
demographic, since liquor folks pay big bucks for co-promotions, but if you
have a personal concern about being associated with liquor, the lm company
will usually respect that.
You also want to be careful about credit in marketing and also on the
soundtrack album cover, in particular, stickers on CDs and vinyl (a smaller issue
these days, but still around). Particularly if you’re a major artist, your label (and
you, too) won’t want your name used more prominently than the other artists
on the soundtrack album. Most record labels only allow your name to be listed
if three or four other artists on the album are also listed, and they’ll say that your
name can’t be larger or more prominent than any others. They may also require
the listing to be in alphabetical order, to keep you from being the main piece of
bait on the hook.

Credit
The other major negotiating point is your credit in the lm. Unless you have
the main title song (which I’ll talk about in a minute), you won’t have much to
say about credit. Just make sure your credit is no less prominent than any other
artist’s, both as to size and placement in the lm. In reality, this means you’ll be
included in the crawl, which are those credits resembling an eye chart that roll
by at the end of the lm after everyone’s left the theater or clicked into the next

streaming work of art. (Everyone except me, that is, because I always stay to see
who did the music. Half the time I can’t read it because it goes by too fast.)
If you do the main title song (meaning the song at the beginning of the
picture, as opposed to the end title song, which is, not surprisingly, the song
played over the credits at the end), you can sometimes negotiate a credit in the
main titles. Main titles are where the director, writer, and stars are credited,
and are usually, but not always, at the beginning of the picture. If they’re at the
end, they’re the rst credits after the picture nishes.
Whether or not you get main-title placement, a title song performer should
be able to get a single card credit (meaning no other credit is on the screen at
the same time as yours), or at least a card shared only with the songwriter.
You should also ask for your credit to be the same size as the director’s,
writer’s, and ( lm) producer’s credit.

RECORD RIGHTS TO FILM PERFORMANCES
When we move into soundtrack records, things get more complicated. Way
more complicated.
First, as with your performance in the lm, your record company has to sign
o . You’re their exclusive artist, and if the soundtrack album isn’t on their label,
they have to agree you can go somewhere else.
Assuming you get your record company to go along, then you need to
negotiate a deal not only for the use of your recording in the lm (which
involves the issues we discussed in the prior section), but also for the use of your
recording on the soundtrack album. There are seven (count ’em! seven!) aspects
to soundtrack album deals:
1. What’s your royalty? Is it all-in (if you’ve forgotten what that means,
we’ll discuss it in a second) or net to you?
2. Is your royalty paid to you (rarely) or to your record company?
3. What can the company that distributes the soundtrack album recoup
against your royalty?

4. Once the soundtrack distributor recoups, and royalties are payable to
you, what can your record company recoup against that royalty?
5. Exactly what record rights does the lm company get?
6. If your label doesn’t distribute the soundtrack album, can your label use
the recording? And if so, how can they use it?
7. Who’s responsible for what in connection with music videos?
Let’s take these in order:

Royalty
Artists’ royalties on soundtrack albums generally hover in the range of 12% to
14%; all-in (i.e., including the producer, mixer, guest artists, and any other
royalty participants), and if you’re a new artist, it’s sometimes even lower. If
you get a net royalty, meaning the record company pays everyone else and you
get to keep everything they pay you, it will of course be lower (at a minimum,
they have to pay a producer, but they could be obligated to pay a royalty to a
guest artist, mixer, etc.).
Animated lms like to pay even less (animation pays less for pretty much
everything, by the way, since the star is often a singing weasel).
If you’re midlevel and up, your royalty will almost always be lower than you
would get in the marketplace, because the lm company takes part of the
royalties.
An exception to all this is where the soundtrack album is distributed by the
same label to whom you’re signed. In that case, you should get the royalty you
have under your record deal.
These royalties are pro-rata (see page 170), which means you only get a small
piece of the royalty on albums (because you’ll only have one or two cuts out of
the ten or more on the album). In the streaming era, this is becoming less and
less relevant, since you get the full amount on single-song streams, and full
album sales and downloads are only a small part of the biz. But physical goods
are still around, so let’s go over it.

If all the artists on the album are at about the same level, a 12% to 14% prorata is pretty fair. However, if you’re the only star on the record (such as an
album whose other cuts are by a bunch of low-level dorks, or if yours is the only
song on an album of underscore [meaning the orchestral score]), you should
de nitely get more. In these cases, you’re justi ed in asking for a much higher
royalty, say in the 16% to 18% range—sometimes more if you’ve really got
clout. You might also ask for a oor, meaning that no matter how many tracks
are on the album, your pro-rata royalty will be no less than say one-tenth (or
one-eleventh, or one-twelfth, depending on your bargaining power) of the total
royalty. For example, if you had a 10% royalty and a oor of one-tenth, you’d
get 1% on the album even if there were fourteen tracks. Still another technique
is to get a non-pro-rated royalty, of say 1% to 1.5% on the entire album. The
companies will kick and scream, but if you have enough clout, you can pull it
o . It’s getting easier because this concept is only relevant for CD and vinyl sales
(and for full-album downloads, which are swirling toward the drain).
It’s also possible to get escalations based on sales of the album.
For a featured instrumentalist or a featured vocalist (which we discussed on
page 456), royalties are in the range of 9% to 10%, pro-rated based on the
number of album cuts, and further pro-rated if you’re performing with another
royalty artist (for example, if you sing with an orchestra that gets a royalty).

The Record Company Piece
Record companies want to collect all the royalties you get from soundtrack
recordings. They normally keep 50%, as a cost of waiving your exclusivity and
allowing your recording to be released on somebody else’s label. If you have an
enormous amount of bargaining power, you may be able to beat them down
below 50%, but it’s getting tougher to pull this o . However, if your company
happens to be distributing the soundtrack album, you should ask for 100% of
the royalty, because you’re not being released from any exclusivity.
The companies normally treat your share of royalties exactly the same as all
other royalties under your deal. That means they use your royalty to recoup
your de cit, or else pay it to you on your next accounting statement if you’re

recouped. Sometimes you can get half or all of your share paid to you even if
you’re unrecouped. The ability to do this varies directly with your bargaining
power.
If you get an advance against your royalties, the record company will also
want a piece of that.

Recoupment
Unlike record deals, where everything is recoupable, in lms you can often
knock out a good portion (sometimes even all) of the costs. Let’s look at them
individually:
Recording Costs. You can sometimes make all or a portion of the recording
costs nonrecoupable. You do this is by arguing that the costs of recording are
really costs of the lm, which they’d have to spend even if there wasn’t an
album, and therefore it’s not fair to charge these costs against your royalties. If
you’ve got some clout, you can pull it o . If not, you’ll end up with anywhere
from 50% to 100% of the costs being recoupable.
Artist’s Performance Fee. Another question is whether any of your fee to
record for the lm is recoupable from your royalties. Again, you can take the
position that this is a fee to perform for the lm, not on records, and so they
shouldn’t recoup it. If you have some bargaining power, you can pull this o ;
otherwise, a part of it may be recoupable. (As a negotiating ploy, if you want to
increase your fee and are getting nowhere, try making a portion of the increase
recoupable. But use this as a last resort.)
Sometimes soundtrack albums are nanced by a record company that pays
for the music and gets the right to put out the album (we’ll discuss these deals in
Chapter 33). The monies paid by the record company are advances against the
soundtrack album royalties, and because the lm performers’ fees come out of
these advances, all or a portion of the fee is often treated as an advance against
the artist’s royalties.

Conversion Costs. As good as all this news sounds, there are costs recouped
under lm deals that aren’t chargeable under record deals. They’re not charged
under record deals for a simple reason: They don’t exist in record deals.
These babies are known as conversion costs, a name I take credit for
inventing. (I’m usually a pretty modest guy, but every once in a while
something gets the better of me.) Conversion costs are the costs of converting a
lm recording to a recording that can be used in a record. For example, the
recording for the lm might only be thirty seconds, but you need a threeminute version for the record. The conversion costs are the expenses to do this,
and they include the kind of costs you’d expect, such as remixing, editing,
overdubbing additional instruments (called sweetening), and sometimes even
totally re-recording the song. But they also include something you haven’t seen
before, called:
Re-use Fees. Whenever you take a recording made for one medium (in this
case, a motion picture) and use it in another (like records), the unions
(speci cally, SAG/AFTRA for vocalists and AFM for instrumentalists and
conductors) charge you a fee. These fees are called re-use fees or new-use fees
because they are charges to re-use an existing recording in a di erent way (a new
use). (Re-use fees are also payable when you go the other way around—taking a
recording made for records and using it in a lm—and in other situations, like
going from television to records, records to television, records to commercials,
etc.) The reasoning is that, when you use an existing recording, you don’t have
to hire the singers and musicians you would have needed to re-record the song.
Since you’re putting union members out of work, the unions allow you to do
this only if you pay them an amount listed on a schedule (which is close to
union scale for the missed sessions).
The re-use fees charged for a particular recording are directly proportionate
to the number of performers on the track. Thus, a three-piece band is cheap,
and the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra is not. Indeed, for a fully
instrumental, orchestral soundtrack album, the re-use fees can run $90,000 or
more. However, there is a big exception: The AFM allows release of an album
containing only score without payment of any re-use until it sells 15,000 copies.

In doing the calculation, each downloaded track counts as one-twelfth of an
album, meaning 180,000 single track downloads equal 15,000 copies.
(Interestingly, streaming doesn’t count toward triggering the AFM payment.)
This exclusion allows totally obscure and mediocre scores to see the light of day.
Conversion costs are almost always recoupable from your royalties.
Re-recording Restriction. Just like your record deal, soundtrack deals
include a re-recording restriction (see page 178). The period is usually ve years,
but the date can be from recording, from release of the picture, or from release
of an album or single. If the date is measured from anything except the date of
recording, be sure the restriction period someday expires. Otherwise, for
example, if it’s measured from release, and the track is never released, it goes on
forever.
Also, even during the restriction, try to exclude live streams, festival
broadcasts, TV appearances, and the like.
Singles. Another point of contention is the question of whether there will be
a single, and if so, who can put out a single with your performances on it.
The “whether” question depends on scheduling. A single is most helpful to
the lm if it’s a hit right when the lm opens. But if you’re promoting your
own singles around that time, your record company won’t want a competing
soundtrack single out there ghting for attention.
Assuming there’s going to be a single, the next question is, which company
will put it out? Historically, the artist’s label always kept singles rights, because
they wanted to coordinate the single with their other marketing e orts around
you (and didn’t want anyone else making money on you). Then physical singles
got to be unpro table because, as we discussed, it can be expensive to promote a
single, and single sales fell o a cli . However, in those days a successful single
drove sales of albums, and since the soundtrack distributing company got the
pro ts from the album, it had an incentive to spend money on singles. So the
artist’s labels quit being so precious and let the soundtrack album companies
handle the singles.

Then the streaming age arrived and a “soundtrack album” became primarily
a “playlist” on the streaming services. Moreover, most consumers don’t stream
the entire album; they just listen to the tracks they like. Meaning everything is
basically a single. Now what?
Well, it was clear that physical and downloads would be handled by the
soundtrack album company, but if those were the only rights they had, they
couldn’t make enough money to justify their expenses. So the practice now is
that all rights (including streaming) are controlled by the soundtrack album
distributor, but they pay a large chunk of the money, maybe even 50% of the
pro ts from streaming, to the artist’s label. Physical formats are usually a royalty
(not pro t share) to the artist’s label.

Can Your Record Company Use the Recording?
As noted earlier, one nice goodie you can sometimes get is the right to use the
recording on your own albums. Because of declining album sales, this has
become much less of an issue, but for the time being, it’s still around.
If the lm company allows you to use the recording on your own album,
they’ll limit it to one album, or maybe one studio album plus one Greatest Hits.
They’ll also say you can’t put it on your record for a period of somewhere
between six months (if you’ve really got clout) to two years, with the norm
being around one year. The period before you can release the recording on
your record is called a holdback. The clock may start at release of the picture,
release of the soundtrack album, or release of your recording as a single.
Whatever you do, make sure the date someday arrives. For example, if you
measure your period from release of the soundtrack album, and the album is
never released, you could never use it. If you ask, the lm company will usually
agree to an outside date after which you can use it no matter what.
Sometimes your record company wants to put the cut on your own album
at the same time as the soundtrack album is out (in other words, there’s no
holdback). The lm company (and especially the record company with the
soundtrack album) won’t like this at all. But if you’re important enough, and
it’s the only way they can get you, they may go along.

When you use the track on your own record, you’ll of course get the royalty
under your own deal, which will likely be higher. However, you’re responsible
for paying the producer and any other royalty participants.
In recent years, with rare exceptions (like Black Panther or A Star is Born,
for example), soundtrack album sales have been abysmal, so there’s been a trend
for many pictures not to have a soundtrack album at all. In that case, the only
records with the soundtrack cut are the artist’s own, and there’s obviously no
holdback. When there’s no soundtrack album, your label and the lm company
may nonetheless work together to promote your song as a single.
The lm company may ask for a piece of your royalty if you use it on your
record, and my response is to tell them to stu it. So far, they’ve generally
stu ed it, though they may work out a deal with your record label.

Music Videos
If there’s going to be a music video, the soundtrack album distributor and the
lm company usually share the cost 50/50, and the lm company customarily
supplies footage from the lm (at no cost) to be included in the video.
In the beginning, lm companies turned these videos into long previews of
the movies. This worked terri cally until the TV broadcasters gured out they
were giving away free advertising for the lm, at which point the practice came
to an abrupt halt. So now there’s limited footage from the lm in a music video,
and in fact there’s usually a second version without any lm footage.
You should ask for some creative approval of videos, but this is really hard
because the lm company (rightly) sees this as marketing for the lm. You can
usually pull o consultation rights (meaning they talk to you about it, but
don’t need your approval).

29
Film Songwriter Deals

TERMINOLOGY
Let’s now look at lm songwriter deals. By songwriter deals, I mean deals for
songs (both music and lyrics, or sometimes instrumental only) written for the
lm, as opposed to what’s known as the score or underscore, which is
background music underneath dialogue, action, etc. (We’ll deal with
underscore in Chapter 30.) Also, this chapter deals with creating a song for the
lm, as opposed to licensing an existing song (not written for the lm).
(Licensing songs is covered in Chapter 31.)

DEAL POINTS
When you write a song for a lm, you typically get a fee plus songwriter
royalties. If you’re a songwriter of even moderate stature, you may be also able
to keep a piece of the publishing.

Fees
The range of songwriting fees is anywhere from zero to $100,000 plus for
established writers, and there are occasionally deals even higher in the
stratosphere. Zero is also possible, though rare, and it can happen with a lowbudget lm that has no music budget and, instead of paying, lets the songwriter

keep all the publishing (see page 234, where we talked about the fact that songs
in lms can earn performance monies in foreign territories, as well as on
television here).
The majority of deals fall in the range of $25,000 to $50,000 for major
studio lms. Whether or not the writer gets a part of the publishing also a ects
the size of the fee.
If you’re a big-name songwriter, you can sometimes get additional monies
(called kickers) based on the success of the lm. For example, you might get
more dough if the lm does $100 million U.S. box-o ce gross; another kicker
at $150 million, etc. As more lms are being made for video streamers,
however, this is going away. There’s no pattern yet of how bonuses would work
in the streaming age; people are just trying for higher fees.
A lm company will never obligate itself to use a song. The most it will do is
agree to pay the fee, which is known as pay or play because it can either use
your song (play) or pay you to go away.
If your song isn’t used, you should ask them to assign back any interest in the
copyright they may have gotten. You may or may not get this, since they’ve paid
you the full fee.

Step Deals
Songwriter deals are sometimes done on a step basis, meaning the deal is done
over a series of “steps.” The steps are:
1. The writer creates the song and gives the company an informal demo
recording. They only get a small amount of money for this, or
sometimes nothing other than the costs to record the demo.
2. If the lm company doesn’t like the demo, it either passes or goes to step
two, which requires the writer to rewrite the song for a small additional
fee (or maybe no more money). If the company then likes it, it’s a rm
deal; if not, the deal is o .
3. Once the lm company is happy, it goes forward on a prenegotiated deal
to use the song. At this point the deal is the same as the songwriter deals

we just discussed, although I like to ask for more money because we’ve
covered their downside.
All of this is a fancy way of saying the writer does it on spec (meaning “on
speculation”). In other words, he or she writes the song without a commitment
from the lm company to pay a full fee. It may be completely on spec, meaning
no writer’s fee up front, or the lm studio may pay a small fee (usually in the
range of $2,500 to $5,000, sometimes as high as one-half the normal fee) for
writing the song. If the studio likes the song and wants to go forward, it pays the
rest of the full fee.
If you’re a major songwriter, you should do very little on spec. You don’t
want to spend your time working on a project that will pay you half or less of
your normal fee. Also, rejection is not good for your self-image, unless you get
your full fee. (It’s not great even then, but at least you didn’t totally waste your
time.)
If you’re doing a step deal, try to get your song back if they don’t accept the
demo. The studio will only be out a few bucks, and they shouldn’t get
ownership rights. They, of course, argue that they paid for the demos, and may
have even given you a small fee, so they should own everything. Still, with some
clout, you should be able to get the song back. However, if you use the song
elsewhere, the studio will require you take out any speci c melody from the
underscore, or any reference to the title, characters, or plot of the lm.
Another way to get your song back (you didn’t hear it here…) is to simply
not sign anything until the demo is accepted and the deal is rm.

Rights Granted
Music written for lms is always treated as a work for hire (see page 319), so
your contract will have the magic language that makes it so. The lm companies
insist on this because, if it’s not a work for hire, you (or your heirs) could
terminate the U.S. copyright assignment after thirty- ve years. (As we discussed
on page 324, there’s no termination right for works for hire.)

With respect to usage, the lm company wants the right to use your song not
only in the lm, but in all the other ways we discussed for recordings on page
457, such as sequels, prequels, spin-o s, remakes, advertising, marketing, theme
parks, and so forth. We discussed limiting these rights for recordings on page
457, and you should be able to get the same kinds of things for your song.

Songwriter Royalties
Traditional lm deals require you to transfer the entire copyright ownership to
the lm studio, and you get 50% of the song’s earnings. As we discussed on page
294, these monies are called the “writer’s share,” and the lm studio’s remaining
50% is called the “publisher’s share.” Under these traditional deals, you get no
share of the studio’s performance monies because you’ll be paid directly by the
PRO (see page 230 if you don’t remember how this works).

Publishing Royalties
While the mainstream publishing industry has done away with the distinction
between writer’s share and publisher’s share, and instead just pays a percentage
of total income (as we discussed on page 294), the distinction between writer’s
share and publisher’s share is alive and well in the lm world. That’s because
songwriters generally just get the writer’s share of royalties.
As noted above, however, if you have some clout, you can sometimes get a
piece of the publisher’s share of income and copyright ownership. This is
typically from 25% to 50% of the publisher’s share, along with the same
percentage of copyright ownership. So if you get 50% of the publisher’s share,
you’ll get (a) 100% of the writer’s share of income, meaning 50% of the total
income, or 50¢ for every dollar that comes in; plus (b) 50% of the publisher’s
share of income (meaning 50% of the remaining 50¢, or 25¢), for a total of 75%
of every dollar that comes in (75¢). However, unlike mainstream publishers,
who just say you get 75% of the income, most lm studios break out the
royalties into two calculations: one for your writer’s share and a separate one for
your piece of the publisher’s share. And in calculating the publisher’s share, they

may try to deduct an administration fee (see page 293 for what that means). In
fact, if the lm studio doesn’t administer its own publishing company, it will
have an administration deal with another publisher, and that other publisher’s
fees will come out before they split with you.
A few studios will write the deal as 75% of income, and in this case, you’ll
only get 50% of the publisher’s share of performance money (see page 294 if
you don’t remember why).
There are some situations, however, where you can’t get a share of the
publishing unless you’re gargantuan, and even then it’s di cult. Those are
when you write songs for (a) animation lms, (b) huge franchise movies like
Star Wars or Marvel, and (c) other nine-hundred-pound gorillas who like to
beat their chests in this area. When traipsing through the ape habitat, get as
much front money as you can, to compensate for the fact that you’re getting
less on the back end.
If your song is based on music in the underscore, getting a share of
publishing is trickier. As you’ll see in the next chapter, underscore composers
typically don’t get a share of publishing in the score. Thus, since the song
includes underscore, the composer won’t have a piece of the publishing. But if
you’re a lyricist who wrote words for the underscore, you can sometimes get a
share of publishing for your piece of the song. For example, if you wrote 50% of
the song, and the studio is sharing 50% of publishing with the creators, you get
half of that 50% publishing, or 25% of the total publishing. Put another way,
you get (a) 50% of 100% of the writer’s share (the writers get 50¢ out of every
dollar, so you get 25¢) plus (b) 50% of 50% of the publishing income
(publishing gets 50¢ out of every dollar, and you get 50% of 50% of that, so you
get 12.5¢ of every dollar). In other words, your grand total is 37.5% of the total
income from the song.
If you’re the underscore composer, and the song is separately identi able
from the underscore—in other words, if it has a distinct name and lyrics—you
should argue for a share of publishing on the song, even though you don’t share
in the same music when it’s used in the underscore. We’ll discuss this more on
page 473.

Also, if you’re the underscore composer and you write a song that is not
based on a theme in the underscore, you should be able to get a separate
songwriter fee and a percentage of that song’s publishing income.
If you do get a share of publishing, the studios want the exclusive
administration rights (see page 224 for a discussion of administration). If you’ve
got clout, you may be able to keep co-administration (unless it’s the title song,
where the studio feels it’s so identi ed with the lm that they have to keep
control). (Co-administration is discussed on page 312.) Even with coadministration, however, there will be restrictions on sync licenses, as we
discussed in connection with recordings on page 252 (e.g., you can’t license to
another lm, TV show, or commercial).
If you don’t get co-administration, you may still be able to approve certain
types of sync licenses (such as commercials), just like in any other songwriter
deal (see page 292), but this takes muscle. At a minimum, try for consultation
rights on commercials, which means they have to discuss proposed uses with
you, but they can make the nal decision. Also, try to get paid directly by the
soundtrack record company for mechanical royalties, and by your performing
rights society for the publisher’s piece of performance monies, so you don’t
have to wait for the money to go through the lm company.
Some small-budget lms will license songs into the lm for a very small fee
and let the composer keep all ownership, administration, and income from the
songs. However, they’ll restrict synchronization licenses, as we’ve discussed.

Credit
The other major provision in a songwriter deal is credit. Normally, unless you
write the title song, and it’s performed by a major artist, you get a credit in the
“crawl” (see page 459). If this is the case, there’s not much to say except that
your credit shouldn’t be any less prominent than any other songwriter’s.
If you do write the main title song, you may be able to get credit on a single
card (meaning no one else’s credit is on the screen at the same time), except that
it can be coupled with the song’s performer, such as “Title song performed by
X, written by Y.” Possibly you can get your card in the main titles (meaning

those listing the stars, director, etc.), and if so, you should ask for the size to be
no less than that of the writer, director, and ( lm) producer.
If the lm features a number of original songs, and you’re the main
songwriter (for example, A Star Is Born or one of the major animated musicals,
like Sing, Trolls, etc.), you should get credit in the main titles (without sharing
with the performer credit). However, this credit is usually conditioned on at
least four or ve of your songs being featured in the lm.
If you’re a really major writer, you may be able to get credit in the billing
block of paid ads for the lm, but this is extraordinarily hard to come by. (The
billing block is that microscopic box of credits down at the bottom of movie
ads.)

30
Composer Agreements

Composers are the guys and gals who write the underscore. Underscore, also
called score, is the music underneath the dialogue, action, transitions, etc., that
you’re not supposed to notice. If you’ve ever seen a lm without music, you
know how stark and empty it feels. A good underscore can radically increase the
impact of a lm, as it enhances the emotions of each scene. A bad score can
make a movie feel weird and grating, and (if you’re like me) become a
distraction that makes you want to strangle the director.
You may be surprised to hear that most lm scoring is no longer done by a
full orchestra sitting in a recording studio, watching lm clips on a giant screen.
With the exception of a few old-school composers who don’t “do” electronics,
most lms are rst scored electronically (meaning with just a synthesizer), so the
director and producer can approve the music. If it’s a small-budget lm, that
electronic score may be it. For bigger-budget lms, once the electronic score is
locked, the composer brings in an orchestra, clamps headphones over their ears,
and has them listen to the electronic score while they overdub their parts
(meaning they replace the synthesized violins with real ones, add acoustic
instruments, etc.). In some cases, the composer freshly records what was in the
electronic score with an orchestra.

DEAL POINTS

Deals for composers are similar to those for songwriters, except that a composer
almost never gets any share of the publishing.
Other than extremely low-budget lms (where the composer might keep the
publishing to compensate for getting little or no fee), the only exception to this
publishing ban is where a portion of the underscore is used in a song written for
the lm (we touched on this on page 470). For example, if you’re a composer,
and the studio hires a lyricist to write words for one of your underscore themes,
you might get some of the publishing for that song. But you only get it if the
stars line up correctly, meaning: (1) the music and lyrics constitute a “real
song,” with its own title, and (2) the lyricist is getting a piece of the publishing
on that song (if the lyricist isn’t getting a share of publishing, it’s much harder
for the composer to get any). Assuming all that works out, and you get a
publishing piece, it will only be for that melody when it’s used in the song. You
won’t share in the publishing earned by uses of that melody in the underscore.
The fee for writing and conducting the score of a major studio theatrical
motion picture is generally from $300,000 to $1 million, though lower-budget
independent lms are less. These fees, particularly at the higher end, sometimes
include the cost of an electronic bed, meaning the composer pays for the
electronic track we discussed earlier.
Tentpole pictures (meaning the massive releases, like Jurassic Park, Avengers,
etc.) and big-budget animated lms sometimes pay more for major composers,
in the $1 million to $2 million range, though the higher end is rare. Also, if the
tentpole expects to use music from prior versions of the lm, the fees are less
because the composer doesn’t have to write as much music.
Sometimes (though rarely these days) studios want to do package deals
(meaning a lump sum that covers both the fee and recording costs) because that
makes it easier for them to manage the lm budget. The prices are in the same
range as above, but can be $50,000 to $100,000 higher to cover the cost of
creating an electronic score. Generally, but not always, the costs of recording
live musicians are paid by the studio on top of the package fee.
If you can avoid a package, you’ll be better o , though that’s not always
possible. As we’ll discuss in a bit, packages can do some serious damage to the
composer’s pocketbook if things don’t go well.

At times composers get bonuses based on box-o ce gross. For example, you
might get $50,000 for every $25 million of box o ce. The size of each bonus,
and the level where it kicks in, is very deal-speci c, depending on the budget of
the lm, the size of your fee, and that ever-present factor, your clout.
Historically, these bonuses were based only on U.S. box o ce, but now you can
get kickers for worldwide box o ce. If you do, the worldwide number is
around two times the U.S. number (though one studio uses 2.25 times U.S.). In
other words, if your bonus is based on $100 million U.S. box-o ce gross, it
would kick in at a worldwide box o ce of $200 million. You should say that
you get your bonus on the rst to occur of these (U.S. or worldwide), in case
the worldwide distribution is delayed (or the foreign grosses suck).
If your bonuses are based on worldwide gross, by the way, the studio will
count only a portion of the gross in China. That’s because the government takes
a huge tari on foreign lms.
By the way, you can only get worldwide bonuses from studios that own the
international distribution rights to the lm. Studios sometimes sell o foreign
rights to independent distributors (for large guarantees that help nance the
lm), and in those cases, the studio makes little or no additional money from
the foreign grosses. So it can only base your bonus on U.S. and maybe
Canadian earnings.
Having said all that, other than for the major blockbusters, I’m sure you
know that theaters have been challenged over the last few years and box o ce
receipts have been weak. So these bonuses are harder to achieve. Also, many
lms are made for streaming only, so there may be no box-o ce gross at all, or
the lm may only spend a week or two in theaters. As I write this, there’s no real
substitute for box o ce bonuses, though one may develop. Until then, you just
have to try for higher fees.
As to other deal points, most of the issues we discussed in Chapter 29
concerning songwriters also apply to composers. However, there are some
weird twists that live only in composer-land, so let’s take a walk down that
winding path.

Delivery Date. Interestingly, composer deals have no term. They go on until
the composer delivers the score, which could mean the composer works on a
lm for four or ve months, sometimes even years.
The process starts with spotting, which means the composer and director
determine precisely which “spots” need music, as well as the exact length of each
piece needed (measured in tenths of seconds). Historically, spotting happened
only when there was a nal cut of the lm, meaning there wouldn’t be any
more changes. However, with animation, and with lms that add a lot of special
e ects after they’ve been shot, it’s not uncommon for the composer to get
chunks of the lm over time. In this case, they do the spotting and composing
for each of the pieces as they come.
Whether the lm comes to the composer in pieces or in one big glorious
package, it’s common for directors to keep making changes all along. Which
means the music has to keep adjusting. This is more serious than it sounds. A
change of even one second in a scene may require a total rewrite of the music
because a well-written score moves precisely with the action on screen, and even
a slight variation throws everything out of whack. It’s like a marching band
doing an extra half step between beats. So changes mean the composer goes back
to the drawing board, though sometimes a good music editor can creatively edit
existing music to t the new scene.
Anyway, because there’s no end date, you could be tied up for a looooong
time. Which brings us nicely to our next topic:
Exclusivity. Composer deals used to be exclusive until delivery of the score,
which meant you couldn’t do anything else during that time. Since the studios
no longer limit how long they can keep you working—as we discussed, the deal
goes on until you nish—you have to insist that your deal is non-exclusive,
meaning you can take other work rather than starve. The studio will agree to
this, but only if you agree that your work for them is your rst priority, which
means no other work will prevent you from delivering to them on time.
The studios all require exclusivity toward the end, from the time you
actually start recording the score until you nish.

Payment Schedule. Historically, before you got any money, the studios made
you sign something called a Certi cate of Authorship, also known to its
friends as a C of A. This is a one-page document that says they own everything
you do, and the problem is that you’re giving up ownership without having the
deal fully negotiated. So once you sign it, you lose a lot of leverage.
More and more, studios have now adopted a policy of not paying any
money until the full contract is signed. Because these deals can be pretty
complex, this policy can seriously delay your paycheck. So if you’re working for
one of these studios, it’s a good idea not to do too much work before the
contract is signed.
Composers normally get their fees in either thirds or fourths. If it’s in thirds,
you usually get one-third on spotting, one-third on commencement of
recording, and one-third on completion of services. If you’re paid in fourths,
expect one-fourth on spotting, one-fourth on commencement of recording,
one-fourth on completion of recording, and the balance on completion of
services. “Completion of recording” is almost always the same as “completion of
services,” but occasionally you have to stick around and help with dubbing the
music into the picture, editing for the soundtrack album, sweeping the oor,
etc.
Major composers can speed up the payment schedule a bit. Here’s a recent
deal (it’s in thirds and sixths, but it could also be fourths as well): one-third on
commencement of services and execution of the agreement, one-third on
commencement of recording, one-sixth on delivery of the score, and one-sixth
on completion of all services.
The studios that pay based on a C of A will hold back some money until
signature of the full agreement, which may be well after the services have started
(or nished). The holdback is usually from 10% to one-third of the total fee.
Orchestrations. It may surprise you to know that many composers don’t have
the ability to write musical parts for each instrument in their orchestras. (In fact,
some composers don’t even read music, although this is rare. These guys are
known in the trade as “hummers.”) Most of us assume that all lm composers
are like John Williams, who is a premier orchestral arranger, and who

understands the subtleties of every instrument. However, many composers only
write the melody line for the underscore, then give it to an orchestrator, who
writes out the parts for the trumpets, oboes, clarinets, kazoos, etc. Next time
you see a lm, look for the orchestrator’s credit buried among the assistants,
makeup people, grips, and ga ers (whatever they are).
Orchestrators aren’t used only by composers who are incapable of writing
their own instrumental parts. Quite the contrary, virtually all composers use
orchestrators, if for no other reason than to save the time and/or tedium of
mechanically doing it themselves. However, classically trained composers
usually sketch out the parts pretty thoroughly, and the orchestrator then
becomes more of a copyist. (By the way, I know of one situation where a
composer, under extreme time pressure to nish a lm, hired three
orchestrators at the same time to crank out the parts.)
The orchestrator is of course paid for his or her services. If it’s the composer,
or a primary orchestrator, they get a negotiated fee, usually in the range of $80
per page of score. Second and third orchestrators are generally paid union scale,
but the better-known ones can get more. Scale for orchestrators varies with the
size of the orchestra and number of pages of music. If the lm is non-union, the
per-page fee will usually increase (to about $140 per page) because there are no
residuals. Residuals are royalties that the studios pay to union members when a
lm is used other than in theaters, such as on television and in streaming. If it’s a
non-union project, there are no residuals, so the orchestrator loses money and is
entitled to more up front.
As a rough guideline, at the time of this writing, the price for simple
orchestrations is roughly $400 per minute of music (e.g., thirty minutes is
$12,000), though complex orchestrations can exceed $30,000 for a lm.
Orchestrators can also get something called a booth monitor fee, which means
they get paid to hang out in the recording studio’s control booth while the
session is being recorded, in case the score needs some last-minute surgery.
Booth monitor fees are payable through the AFM (if the project is a signatory to
the union), and they’re roughly a double-scale payment per session (though if
there are two orchestrators, they each get a single-scale payment for booth
monitoring).

An important part of your composer deal is to negotiate whether your
composer’s fee includes orchestrations. Even if the lm company knows you
aren’t capable of doing this job, you may be responsible for paying the
orchestrator out of your fee. Conversely, you may be perfectly capable of doing
orchestrations but (a) your time doesn’t permit it, (b) you’re only willing to do
the orchestrations if you’re paid additional money for the trouble, or (c) you’re
not in the mood. Either way, you should make sure the orchestration fees are on
top of your composer fee (if you don’t raise this issue, the lm company may try
to deduct the cost of orchestrations from your money). Of course, if you’re
doing a package deal that includes everything (as we’ll discuss in a minute), the
orchestrator fees are part of the package cost.
Record Royalties. A lm composer isn’t a performer, so it’s not automatic
that you get record royalties. Underscore royalties are only paid if you are (a)
conducting the orchestra and/or (b) producing the recordings. Sometimes the
composer does neither of those.
Let’s look at the royalties separately:
Conducting Royalties. When conducting, the composer becomes (in a
sense) a recording artist by leading the orchestra. The customary range of these
royalties is 6% to 10% (though some studios won’t go beyond 9%), pro-rated by
the number of cuts (see page 170 for a discussion of pro-ration), and further
pro-rated for royalty artists on any particular cut (see page 152 for a discussion
of joint recordings), or it could be reduced for a specialty vocalist that we
discussed on page 461.
In the real world, many composers don’t actually conduct. Instead, they hire
a conductor and “buy out” his or her rights for a fee payable through the
musicians’ union (if the project is a signatory to the union). The fee is roughly
double- or triple-scale per session. Once they pay the actual conductor, the
composer then steps into their shoes and gets the conductor royalty.
Producing Royalties. If you produce the recordings (see page 123 for what
producing is), you can get 3% to 4%. (Note this is independent of conducting

royalties; you can produce even if you don’t conduct, or vice versa.) Like other
producer royalties, these are retroactive to record one after recoupment (see
page 125 for a discussion of record one retroactivity). Historically, “producing”
didn’t mean much more than remixing the recordings, since no one really
“produced” music that had already been recorded for the lm. However, since a
lot of scores are now electronically prerecorded (as we discussed on page 473),
composers are in fact doing more production—they rst produce the
prerecorded synthesizer score, then, after the orchestra overdubs the prerecord,
they produce and mix the nal product.
You can usually insist on producing the underscore for records, but
composers have had singularly bad luck imposing themselves as producers of
songs. The best you can do is say that the lm company must use you as the
producer of the songs if the artist and record company approve. Sounds great,
but unfortunately, it’s almost meaningless—many artists think of composers as
orchestral geeks and don’t want them as a producer. Of course, if a composer is
a producer of note in his or her own right, that’s a di erent story.
The studios will insist on reducing your royalty if you produce the
recordings and then another producer comes in later and reworks your cuts.
Try to have this only happen with your permission, and in any event try not to
go below 50% of your producing royalty.
Major composers can sometimes get a oor, meaning that if you do
absolutely nothing on the record, you still get a royalty. Usually it’s a guarantee
of one or two cuts on the album. In other words, if you have a 10% royalty, and
there are ten recordings on the album, you would be guaranteed 1% or 2%,
even if you don’t have any recordings on it. You should also argue for the
writer’s share of an imputed mechanical royalty on those tracks, since you
would have been paid that if the tracks were actually included. (By the way, they
don’t really guarantee to include your cuts. They only agree to pay you as if
your cuts were included, so you would get royalties even if none of your work
is on the album.)
A guaranteed minimum is relatively easy to get when the album is mostly
underscore, but it gets di cult to impossible if you’re working on a lm with a
number of pop songs (like a Quentin Tarantino movie). The reason is obvious

—the company has to pay royalties to a lot of expensive outside artists, and
there’s no assurance there will even be any score tracks on the album.
Recently, the guaranteed minimum issue has become much less relevant.
That’s because CDs and downloads are fading, and even though vinyl is still
hanging in there, most everything is now a single-song stream. But the
guarantee is still worth asking for.
Some very major composers get a guarantee that there will be a score album
released (many lms don’t release score albums, even if they release song
albums). However, in recent years, this has been extremely hard to come by,
since there are so few soundtrack albums being made and they don’t earn very
much. But couldn’t the studio just throw out an album on the streaming
services to satisfy the composer’s ego? What’s the big deal?
Well, it could be expensive to do that. Can you gure out why?
Score yourself a hundred points if you remembered that you have to pay
conversion costs when you put lm music in another medium—records in this
case. (Conversion costs are discussed on page 462.) This has become somewhat
less of an issue recently, however, because of a new union rule that says there are
no re-use fees for score albums that sell under fteen thousand copies. But if it
goes over that, it can be really expensive for an orchestral album.
Recoupment. With composers, the record company normally recoups only
conversion costs. That’s pretty well settled. But there is an argument over what
royalty these costs are recouped from. The best is to have them recouped from
the gross royalty payable to all participants, and the worst is recoupment from
your artist/conductor royalty (the bigger the royalty rate that’s used for
recoupment, the faster you’ll get paid).
Most deals say that you won’t get paid until the lm studio has recouped
everything that’s charged against the studio’s royalty, which could include
advances to other folks that can slow you down quite a bit. Your argument is
that most of the studio’s advances were used to pay artist advances and
recording costs, and therefore the studio will be able to recoup those costs from
the artists’ royalties. Accordingly, it’s not fair for them to take these advances

and costs out of the overall royalties before paying you. Sometimes you can pull
this o , and sometimes the studio will agree only if the record company agrees.
Try to get the record company to pay your royalties directly to you once the
conversion costs have been recouped. The studios don’t like to do this, so you’ll
have to ght. But you’ll get the royalties faster if they’re paid directly to you
rather than to the lm company, who won’t pay them for another accounting
period.
Credit.
There are three places you could get credit:
1. In the lm. Composers normally get main title, single-card credit. (See
page 459 for a discussion of lm credits.)
2. Paid ads. All composers can get credit in paid ads where the full billing
block of lm credits appears. Midlevel to major composers can get credit
in ads even if the only credits are the writer, lm producer, and director.
(See page 472 about paid ads.)
3. Soundtrack album. Composer credit on soundtrack albums has
historically been a hot issue, though it’s becoming less relevant as it only
applies to CDs and vinyl.
As we discussed, the composer isn’t really an “artist”—he or she only
wrote the music, and maybe conducted it or produced the record. So it’s
not a foregone conclusion that the composer will get credit on the
soundtrack album. Which means you gotta ask.
The exact credit can sometimes be a tussle as well. Composers want
the credit “Music by,” but if there is other music in the lm, the studios
want to say “Score by” or “Underscore by” or “Flowers by” (okay, I made
up the last one to see if you were sleeping). The composers ght hard for
“Music by.”
Unless there’s another producer who’s been engaged, composers
normally also get a “produced by” credit.
Ideally, you want credit on the front cover of the soundtrack album
(or the digital artwork equivalent). The lm company will argue

(correctly) that it doesn’t control this; it’s up to the soundtrack album
record company. So you’ll probably end up with a commitment for the
lm company to use its “reasonable e orts” to get you front-cover credit.
Whether you get front-cover credit also depends on the nature of the
album. If it’s a compilation of songs by major artists, you’re not likely to
get credit on the front cover—bluntly, your name won’t mean as much
as the names of the artists. However, if it’s a 50% or more score album,
front-cover credit shouldn’t be too di cult.
You should always insist (and the lm company should have no
trouble agreeing) that you get composer credit anywhere that the
songwriters and artists are credited. Also, you should always get credit as
a composer in the metadata that’s used when streaming the track (see
page 72 for what metadata is).
If you’re the producer, you’ll get credit for that in the same way that’s
customary for producers.
Other Uses. As we discussed earlier, lm companies take the right to use music
in more than just the lm for which you’re hired. As the composer, you pretty
much have to go along, but the question is whether you can get more money
for any other uses.
As noted in the last chapter, with enormous clout, songwriters can
sometimes get paid for sequels, prequels, spin-o s, and other uses. However,
composers normally don’t get additional monies for that or anything else
related to the original lm, even in situations where the lm company gets
money (see page 436 for a laundry list).
Travel Expenses. It’s not uncommon for composers to record in places where
it’s cheaper than L.A. or New York (like England, Ireland, the Czech Republic,
Germany, or Canada, or the slightly less exotic Seattle or Salt Lake City). In this
case, you should negotiate for reimbursement of your travel expenses. On a
high-class, big-budget picture, this is usually business-class travel (unless you’re
Godzilla, or unless it’s a very long ight, in which case you can sometimes pull
o rst class), plus something in the neighborhood of $2,000 to $3,500 per

week for New York or London. Sometimes you can get rst-class
accommodations (meaning a hotel, or apartment if you’re there longer) plus
$100 to $150 per day for all expenses besides the hotel (this is called a per diem,
which is Latin for per day, but it could also be Slovakian for You’re standing on
my ﬂute). For low-budget icks, you’ll get Greyhound tickets and Motel 6
vouchers.
If you’re going to a foreign country, it’s important to get your expense
money in the local currency, as you don’t want to be in the business of
speculating whether the dollar is going to be worth more or less than the peso.
For example, suppose your London hotel room costs £100 per night, which at
the time of your deal is $150. If your deal is $150 per night in dollars, and if the
dollar drops against the pound so that your $150 only equals £90, you’re in
trouble: the room is £100, but you only get £90 for your $150. So you’ll be
coming up £10 short. If your deal says you get £100, you’re covered. For this
reason, it’s better to require the studio to cover the hotels and give you a per
diem for meals and local transportation on top.

PACKAGE DEALS
As we touched on earlier, some composers do package deals, especially in
television and low-budget or independent lms. Packages are very much like a
fund in record deals (see page 98 for a discussion of funds). In other words, the
composer agrees to deliver a completed score for a set dollar amount, and this
money includes both the compensation for the composer’s services and the costs
of recording the score.
Not surprisingly, most package deals are done by composers who create
electronic scores. In other words, they use a small number of musicians
(sometimes only the composer) to create music on a synthesizer (which, these
days, can sound like the Academy of St Martin in the Fields).
There are some score package deals that use real orchestras, but they tend to
be for really big money (we’ll discuss how big in a minute). In these deals, the
composer gets the lm’s entire music budget, less only an amount the studio

thinks it’ll need to license existing songs and recordings, and/or to create new
songs and recordings.
There is also a hybrid package, which consists of synthesizer recordings
mixed with orchestral recordings (see the next section). Other than a few indie
lms, this is what most lms (that aren’t using a pure orchestra) want.

Package Prices
The price of packages can be anywhere from $50,000 for a low-budget lm up
to $1.8 million or even $2 million plus for a mainstream, big-budget feature
(though packages in big-budget lms are rare; they are mostly low-budget
creatures). The really large packages are most common on lms where the lm
producer requires the score to be recorded outside the United States, which is
often done for tax reasons. But these are rare.
Pure electronic scores (or electronic scores with up to maybe ten musicians
in a package) for major studio lms run around $100,000 to $400,000,
sometimes a bit higher for top-level folk. The hybrid packages described above
(both synthesizer and score) have (a) a package price of $50,000 to $200,000 for
the synthesizer portion, plus (b) a market-rate fee (sometimes as low as union
scale) for the composer’s orchestration and conducting services, plus (c) the
costs of the orchestra and orchestrations, which is paid by the studio on top of
the fee (meaning they’re not part of the package).
At the lower end, I’ve seen starving composers do low-budget lm scores for
a $5,000 to $10,000 package price. In this case you should try to keep the
publishing, and sometimes you can get the right to distribute the soundtrack
album as well. Even if you can’t keep those, you should get a nice chunk of the
income from publishing and records, since you’re taking so little up front.

Exclusions
If you’re going to make a package deal, you have to worry about exactly what
you have to deliver in the package. Most contracts just require you to deliver
“all music,” and the trick is negotiating what’s not included.

This turns out to be more complicated than you’d think, and through the
courtesy of my friend Michael Gorfaine (one of the most experienced lm
music agents in the business), I bring you the following list of exclusions:
Licensing of Outside Music (i.e., songs not written by the composer for
this project). Since most contracts say you must provide “all music,” I’ve seen
lm companies license an expensive outside tune and expect the composer to
pay for it. You can’t control the costs of outside songs (indeed, one license could
eat half your package fee), so never agree to this.
Note you want the exclusion stated as “songs not written by the composer
for this project.” Some composers have a “library” of cues they’ve previously
written, and there’s an issue whether those should be excluded from the package
price. We’ll discuss these babies in a minute.
Recording Costs of Outside Music. If the sessions for outside music can’t be
scheduled during the normal scoring sessions, their costs shouldn’t be included
in the package.
Re-use Fees. (See page 463 for a discussion of re-use fees.) Not your problem.
But…
(1) You can’t exclude re-use fees from the package if you’re composing for a
non-union lm. The reason is that there won’t be any union re-use fees
for non-union musicians. But this means, if you hire a union person,
the studio will make you pay their residuals. So watch it…
(2) Even if it’s a union project, if you make a deal where you own the
recordings, re-use fees will be your responsibility. That’s because your
exploiting the recordings apart from the movie will trigger a re-use fee,
and since the studio doesn’t share in that income, they won’t bear the
expense.
Re-scoring. This is one of the most important and trickiest areas. The concept
is to save your rear end if the director says he or she wants an angelic harp
accompanying a scene, which you record and deliver, only to have the director

later decide they meant hip-hop. In other words, if the lm people require you
to re-record for reasons totally beyond your control (as opposed to your
screwup), it should be on them.
Lyricist Expenses. If the studio wants a lyricist to write words to your music,
it should be on their nickel.
Vocalist Expenses. As with lyricists, if the company wants somebody to croon
your newly created song, they should pay. Note this isn’t just about featured
artists singing songs in the lm; it could also mean a chorus singing along with
the underscore.
Music Editor Fees. The music editor’s fee should be a lm cost, not a music
cost. A music editor is to lm music what a lm editor is to lm. In other
words, he or she is the technical person responsible for getting all the music in
the right places. They will create the spotting notes (which are detailed notes,
down to a tenth of a second, of where music goes), edit music to t a scene if the
lm has been cut, help with any technical di culties, etc.
Mag Stock and Transfer Costs. Mag stock is the actual soundtrack
imprinted on celluloid lm, and transfer costs are the costs of transferring the
music from the recording studio to the lm. The purpose of this exclusion is to
clarify that you only have to deliver a standard audio recording, and that the
cost of physically putting the music into the lm is a motion picture cost, and
not a package cost.
With digital sound, there are no more mag stock or transfer costs, but
everyone still excludes them from the package, and the words sound so cool that
I’ve left them in the book.
Prerecords. This is music recorded before shooting, to be lip-synced and/or
danced to in the lm. They have to be recorded in advance because the oncamera action has to precisely follow the recording (which of course it can only
do if the recording exists). Note these are not demos of themes prior to writing

the score (those are customarily included in the package), but rather cuts of
nished songs that will actually be in the lm.
A package should include the cost of prerecords only if it’s speci cally
negotiated up front. However, for purely electronic scores, prerecords are
usually included.
Sidelining. This is a situation where a musician either gets on camera and
pretends to perform, or actually performs. Film companies try to charge this
cost against the package, and that’s a matter of negotiation. It’s usually easy to
exclude if you ask, because the musician is paid through SAG/AFTRA as an
actor, and so this shouldn’t be a music cost.
Excess Musicians. For a smaller package, where it’s clear the intent is to use a
primarily electronic score, it’s a great idea to limit the number of musicians
you’re required to supply. For a television package, for example, this is usually
small—in the range of four or ve at the most—and the limit gives you
ammunition to ask for more money if the director has a sudden attack of
orchestra-itis.
Pandemic and Other Disasters. You should exclude any costs for recording
sessions or rescheduling as a result of a pandemic or other reasons beyond your
control.
Mixing and Mastering. For the bigger scores, there’s a push to exclude
soundtrack mixing and mastering from the package. Results vary with
bargaining power.
Library Music. As noted above, there’s an issue over licensing music that was
written by the composer, but not written for the lm. For example, many
composers have built-up “libraries” of music that they own and license to lms.
If you have such a library, you should try to exclude this music from the
package (meaning you can charge them extra if it’s used in the lm).
The studios push back on this. They think compensation for your library
music should be included as part of the package fee. Their argument (not

without merit) is that they’re paying you to create new music, and if they give
you extra money for old stu , you’re likely to save work by tossing in a lot of it.
The usual compromise is to say they won’t have to pay for pre-existing material
unless it’s used at the lm producer’s request.
Of course, any of the above exclusions may be included in your package if it’s
negotiated up front and you budget for it. But be sure they’re only in the
package price if it’s been agreed, or you may be paying the lm company for the
privilege of using your music.

CREATIVE FINANCING
In today’s world, there are a number of lms that use something known loosely
as “creative nancing” (not really an industry term). That’s where an
independent studio (or a major studio for that matter) doesn’t have the budget
to hire the composer they want, and instead comes up with creative ways to
snag their dream symphonist for a lower fee. These are things like:
Back-End Participation. The composer gets a piece of the lm’s pro ts, or
built-in bonuses at certain box-o ce levels (the “kickers” we discussed on page
468).
If it’s a piece of the lm’s pro ts (maybe you’ll get 1% or so), that looks great
on paper. Unfortunately, the reality is that you’re not likely to ever see any
money. Film company accountants are far more creative than record company
accountants, and lm pro ts are de ned in a way that makes them virtually
nonexistent. Still, if the best you can do is to get a share of pro ts, try to get the
same pro t de nition as the director or producer, and hope they had enough
clout to get something decent.
Percentage of Publishing. As we discussed, lm companies normally own
all the publishing for the underscore. In these creative deals, the composer
might get ownership and/or administration. Or if not, certainly a share of the
publishing income. Sometimes the composer gets a large percentage of

publishing until they make a certain sum, then a lesser amount for a while,
maybe dropping to zero at some earnings level.
Soundtrack Record Goodies. The composer gets a higher-than-normal
record royalty, or sometimes the right to own the soundtrack album itself,
subject to paying the lm company a small royalty. If you own it, try to keep all
non- lm rights, such as commercial licenses.
Adding the Advance. The composer’s fee or package price is increased by
some or all of the advance (less conversion costs) that the lm company gets for
the soundtrack album, or for its publishing. In these deals, the additional
monies are almost always recoupable from the composer’s royalties.
If the composer gets several of the above goodies, there’s often a ceiling on the
dough. For example, once the composer has made $1 million from all sources
(including the fee), the participations drop out. However, improved record
provisions usually go on forever.

TELEVISION COMPOSERS
Network and basic cable television composers live in a di erent world from
lm composers. The time they have to compose and deliver is shorter because,
as I’m sure you know, network television programs are cooked up like batches
of cookies right before they go on the air. Also, the budgets to produce TV
shows are substantially lower than motion picture budgets, so the music
budgets get squashed down along with everything else. Thus the composer’s
fees and the money available for recording costs are much less than those for
theatrical lms.
The exceptions are things like HBO, Net ix, and the premium streaming
services, where there can be a long lead time before the project is nished, and
many of these programs want real orchestras for most or all of the shows (think
Game of Thrones as the extreme). These deals have substantially higher package
fees, or even fees plus the cost of the orchestra on top.

The good news is that, even though the fees are lower, the performance
monies generated by broadcast television programs (see page 256) can be
substantial—much more than for lms—because programs may be shown over
and over, forever. However, a lot of the shows and reruns are now on streaming
services, where the composer earns much less performance money than on
broadcast television. But at least that money will keep coming for a long time.

Background Score
Because of the short time frame and lower budgets, television music is tailormade for electronic score packagers (the folks who get an all-in amount that
includes both their fee and the recording costs, as we discussed on page 461). In
fact, almost all television composer deals are packages.
Typical package fees (which include recording costs) are around $5,000 to
$10,000 for a half-hour television episode. One-hour programs are from
$15,000 to $30,000, with most in the range of $22,000. The higher end is only
paid for shows with really big budgets, lots of music, and expectations of
orchestral elements, or for shows that have been on the air a long time (the
longer they’re on the air, the more money the networks pay for them).
Very few TV projects use an orchestra anymore, so the above package fees are
for a synthesizer score. If there is an orchestra, it’s usually a big-budget
production, and the deal is structured as a composer fee (in the range of
$25,000 to $30,000) plus recording costs. In the case where a package includes
an orchestra, the orchestra is usually only part of the music (for example, half of
it), with a synthesizer making up the rest. In this case, the package fee will of
course be higher, in the range of $45,000 per episode. But any kind of orchestra
is rare today, probably less than 10% of television music.
Before a show is sold for a series, the TV producer rst makes either a pilot
(meaning a single episode of a TV show that’s produced in hopes of selling the
show to a network) or something called a sales version or pilot presentation
(which may only be a ten-minute pitch, never intended to be aired). Pilots are
very rare these days; sales versions are pretty much the norm.

For a sales version, studios pay a very small fee, from $500 for thirty minutes
to as much as $5,000 for sixty minutes, including all recording costs and
musicians. For these Dollar Store prices, they get a quick electronic score and/or
cues from the composer’s library. For a fully scored pilot, before it’s sold as a
series, the package fees are the same as an episode (discussed above).
There are, however, some kinds of shows that run above these gures. For
example, shows that are very music intensive (meaning there’s music under
almost the entire show) pay more because the composer has to deliver so much
more. A well-known composer might get a package fee of about $150,000 for
an hour show that’s music heavy.
Another example of higher fees would be a long-running show with a wellknown TV composer and heavy orchestra. That might have a package fee of
about $45,000.
A two-hour made-for-TV-movie package is about $35,000 to $90,000,
though for major composers it can be a fee of $30,000 to $90,000 plus
recording costs.
Miniseries deals are mostly done for a per-episode fee (rather than a total
amount for the entire series). If it’s a package, the fee is about the same as the
sixty-minute episodic package fees we talked about. If they’re done as a fee deal
(with the producer paying the costs on top), the range is about $30,000 to
$50,000 for the entire series. If you’re doing a package for the whole series, it’s
in the range of $100,000 to $300,000, with the higher numbers being for a
series with more episodes. For a miniseries with an orchestral score, the package
amount can be as high as that of a major motion picture.
Usually the TV production studio hires the music editor (see page 485 for
what that means), but some composers like to hire the editor directly. In this
case the composer includes the cost of the music editor in their package, which
typically raises the per-episode fee by $2,000 to $4,000 to cover the cost.
If you want to give somebody a good chuckle, just ask the TV people if you
can have a piece of the publishing. In the television industry, the producer’s
commandment to hold on to publishing isn’t just carved in stone, it’s tattooed
on their foreheads. (Remember all that lovely performance money? The TV
guys gured that out, too.) The only exceptions are some non-studio shows

(miniseries, HBO, TNT, Net ix) or scoring by really big-name TV composers,
where, if you have major clout, you can sometimes get a piece of the publishing
income (though almost never a piece of the copyright, and usually no
administration rights).
If you think it’s bad enough that the television people want to take your
publishing, get a load of this. Some of the smaller TV producers, but also some
cable and streaming networks that produce their own shows, are not only
taking publishing, but are also trying to take your writer’s share of royalties.
Under these deals, you don’t get any of the performance monies I talked about
in the previous section. In fact, you don’t get any money for any use of the
score (besides your fee), even if they put your music in other shows, license it to
a motion picture, use it in ads to sell dog food, etc.
Fight back hard on this. Usually you can keep your writer’s share of
performance monies, but I’ve seen a few situations where they try to buy those
out as well.
And by the way, the fees for these deals aren’t any higher than the fees for
deals where you keep your writer’s royalties!
BE VERY WARY OF THIS. Sometimes you don’t know that’s what they
want until the contract arrives, so you have to be clear up front that you expect
writer’s royalties. If they absolutely refuse, it may be worthwhile to give up
writer’s royalties when you rst get started (to get credits under your belt), but
as soon as you have any clout, ght ercely to hang on.
Other deal points are the payment schedule (usually half on start and half on
completion); record royalties (which are usually left to good-faith negotiations,
unless the producer knows in advance there will be a record); and credit.
Prominent credits are getting harder to come by, but give it a whirl. A half-hour
show credit is usually in the end title crawl no matter what. For one hour or
more, try for a main title or Act One credit, single card, shared only with the
show’s theme composer (our next topic), but the recent trend (if you can get a
single card at all) is for the card to be in the end titles. (See page 459 for what all
this credit stu means.)

TV Themes
Composers sometimes write the main title theme for a television show
(meaning the theme at the beginning of every episode).
This is almost always done as a package. If it’s instrumental only, the package
is in the range of $15,000 to $40,000, leaning toward the higher end if you
include orchestral elements. If the theme has both music and lyrics, the package
price is more like $30,000 to $60,000.
Studios won’t give up publishing on TV themes, but sometimes non-studio
players will.
Occasionally the producers hire a Big Name Writer to compose the television
theme, and someone else (cheaper) to write the weekly score. Big Name gets the
high end of the prices we just discussed. If it’s not a package, they’ll get a fee of
$10,000 to $20,000, and the TV producer pays the costs on top.
Big Name can also get a royalty on records that’s close to what lm
composers get (see page 460).
There’s also a trend for producers to license a well-known song for a theme.
We discussed those rates on page 253.
If the composer is doing the underscore, the fee usually includes writing an
end title theme.

VIDEO GAME COMPOSERS
In recent years, a number of composers have written scores for video games. In
days past, video game scores were predominantly done on a synthesizer.
Nowadays, most of them use live orchestras.
Unlike lms, where the action moves linearly, video game composers have to
pick the right music for every possible twist and turn in the game. In addition to
all this juggling, the composers have to write a lot more music. A typical lm
score has thirty to forty minutes of music, while a typical video game has from a
hundred to sometimes as high as four hundred minutes. And on top, they want
music for DLC, which means downloadable content that comes after the
game’s release as an add-on to the game.

These deals look very much like the deals for motion pictures—the music is
written as a work for hire, the composer usually gets songwriter royalties, etc.
Unlike lms, however, historically there have been very little performance
monies, for the simple reason that video games weren’t played on television or
in theaters. As more and more games are moving to the cloud for online and
mobile usage, however, things are looking brighter on the performance side.
Video gaming sites like Twitch pay performance royalties, and while it’s not yet
signi cant money, it’s growing (a bit). And the PROs are starting to push in this
area.
Some game companies take a much tougher stance and refuse to pay writer
royalties at all (though the writer can collect performance monies from the
performing rights societies). Others take a little softer stance and agree to pay the
writer a share of mechanicals (not for video game sales; only if the song is
exploited on records). However, they won’t pay the writer for anything else,
even if the game company licenses the songs (and gets money) for other uses.
Fees for video games were historically smaller than lm fees, but now they’re
getting closer. While a few deals are the composer’s fee plus costs, most of them
are done as packages (meaning the fee includes recording costs). These deals are
sometimes a at fee for the entire game, but most commonly they’re a dollar
amount for each minute of music. It’s typically $1,000 to $2,000 per minute,
though for big names, it can get up to $3,000, occasionally a bit more. The
packages usually include all music costs except third-party music licenses, rescoring after delivery, and any musicians requested by the game company (for
example, if they request an orchestra, that would be a separate budget and fee).
If it’s a big composer, some can get close to $1 million, though most aren’t
that high.
If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track, go to the Conclusion, on page 511.
Experts: Onward!

31
Licensing Existing Recordings and Existing
Songs for Motion Pictures

This chapter deals with licensing existing recordings and songs (records and
songs not created for the lm).

RECORDING LICENSES
Record Company Recordings
Most of the licenses to use recordings in motion pictures and television are, not
surprisingly, from record companies. The rest are individual owners of
recordings, which we’ll deal with a little later. With record company recordings,
you’ll only be involved in the deals as a secondary player because the
contracting parties are your record company and the lm company, who make a
deal with each other. The money is paid to your record company, who
promptly pockets half and treats the balance as artist royalties under your deal.
If your record contract says they need your consent to license recordings
into lms and TV (see page 191), they’ll call up and ask you to bless the deal. If
the record company doesn’t need your consent, they may not even call you,
although most will as a courtesy. (By the way, even if you don’t have the right to
consent in your record deal, if you wrote the song and control the publishing,
you can block the deal—remember, the right to use the recording is only the
right to use the physical recording itself. The record company can’t give a lm

company the right to use the musical composition [they don’t have these
rights], so the lm company has to make a deal with both the record company
and the publisher to get a full set of rights. Therefore, if you’re the publisher, or
have control of syncs in your publishing deal, you can control these license
deals through the side door even if you can’t do it through the front door.)
Because you may be asked to consent to these deals, and because you share in
the income, you should know how they work. So let’s take a look.
A record company/ lm company recording license has two main elements:
1. How much is the fee to synchronize the recording in the lm (and for
advertising/marketing if the lm company wants that as well)?
2. If the recording is also going on a soundtrack album or will be released as
a single track, what’s the royalty?

Recording License Fees
The fee to use a recording in the lm varies directly with the importance of the
song in its own right (was it a number one single or an obscure album cut?), the
stature of the artist, and how it’s used in the lm. The highest fees go for use of a
recording that is integrated with the on-screen action (for example, the actors
are dancing to it, or singing along), so that it takes on dramatic content and
moves the story forward. Also at the high end are licenses to play the recording
over the main titles, or the license of a cut that’s the title of the lm (think
Bohemian Rhapsody). At the low end, a recording might be playing on a radio
in the background for ten seconds while people are talking, so that you need a
tru e-sni ng pig to even know it’s there.
Obviously, there are all shades of variations in between, and sometimes it’s
just a question of how much the producer has fallen in love with a particular
cut. The range of fees is the same as what’s paid for use of the song that’s
embodied in the recording, which we discussed on page 243, and in fact you
should insist that your fee is most favored nations (meaning no less than) what
the lm company pays for the song publishing. (By the way, the publishers insist
on the same MFN as the fee for the recording.)

You should always ask the record company to pay through your half of the
fee if you’re unrecouped, on the age-old theory of “Hey, no harm in asking.”
Most of the time you won’t get it, so don’t let that a ect your self-esteem.

Royalties
If the deal also grants record rights, the range of royalties paid to the record
company is 11% to 14% for each track, which would be pro-rata if there’s an
album (see page 170 for what pro-rata means). You’ll get half of this from your
record company, unless you can bludgeon more out of them. However, if your
record company is releasing the soundtrack album or the track, you should get
100% of your normal royalty.
If your recording is the key track on the soundtrack album (meaning, for
example, it’s the only song in an album of underscore, or it’s the only hit in an
album of obscure toads), or if it’s the theme song or the title of the lm or TV
show, then the royalty should be higher, as we discussed for artists (in Chapter
28). In addition, your record company can usually get a most favored nations
treatment for the recording, at least insofar as other existing recordings are
concerned. The lm company usually wants to reserve the right to pay higher
royalties for recordings that are created for the lm.
Since the lm company didn’t pay the recording costs, the only things that
can be recoupable are the union re-use fees (see page 463), and this, too, is
negotiable. The fee paid to use the recording in the lm or television program
should not be recoupable.
Film companies sometimes pay a small advance for the record use.

Other Recording License Deal Points
The other deal points are about consent: from the AFM (American Federation
of Musicians) and you.
AFM Consent. There is an obscure rule in the AFM labor agreement that
requires not only the payment of re-use fees, but also the consent of the AFM to

put existing recordings in a motion picture or television program. The theory is
that the union won’t put musicians out of work (i.e., by not requiring a new
recording session) unless it’s such a unique recording that a new recording
won’t do justice to the lm. An example would be a Buddy Holly recording,
which can’t be duplicated since Buddy isn’t available. In actual practice,
however, I’ve never seen the union object to any licensing—in fact, this rule is
almost always ignored and no one even asks. If you do ask, their consent is a
rubber stamp.
You. Since the licensing deal is between your record company and the lm
company, you’re not directly involved. But once the deal gets under way, the
record company will call up your manager and ask if you’re okay with the use of
your recording in a particular lm. How do you evaluate this?
On the nancial side, you should review the deal and decide if you think it’s
fair. (We discussed the range of fees on page 253 for songs, and the recordings
get the same amount.) If the deal sounds okay, then proceed to the next step,
which is just as important, but often overlooked: You should nd out precisely
what’s going on in the lm when your song is being played. I have avoided a
number of disasters with this simple question. For example, a lm company
once wanted to use a recording of one of my clients during a scene where kids
were shooting drugs. Or perhaps it’s a graphic sexual sequence (which,
depending on your image, could be a plus). Remember, it’s your music and
your career, so be careful about the creative aspects.

Non–Record Company Recordings
As we discussed in the section on record deals, artists don’t usually end up
owning their own recordings, and even when they do, they often license the
rights to a record company for a number of years. On the other hand, there are
artists whose careers are, shall we say, “taking a holiday”—they might have been
huge in the eighties or nineties, but they don’t mean as much today. Often these
artists are “between deals” and have recorded stu that they own. The same

holds true for other artists whose deals have expired, and they’ve decided they
can make more money by recording and distributing their own records.
An important subcategory of this is where artists have re-recorded their
major hits after the re-recording restrictions expired (see page 178 for rerecording restrictions). That way they can license the re-recorded version and
keep all the money, rather than share it with the record label. This was possible
under older deals, because the re-recording restrictions were much looser in
those days. As we discussed, many contracts today say you can never duplicate
your old recordings, even after the re-recording restrictions expire, for exactly
this reason.
When these artist-owned recordings are licensed for movies, the deals are
pretty much the same as those outlined above, except of course there’s no
record company in the middle. Meaning you keep all the money. Which I guess
is no small “except”…
Another type of recording license is made by composers who’ve built up a
library of instrumental recordings that they license into small lms. The lm
companies take these tracks and hire someone to sing over them. This is similar
to the underscore library music we discussed on page 486, but they’re more
than instrumental cues—they’re actual song recordings without the vocals.
These library songs go for anywhere from $500 to $5,000.

LICENSING EXISTING MUSICAL COMPOSITIONS
FOR FILMS
As we just discussed, the money paid to use a recording goes to your record
company. This means two things:
1. Right o the top, they get half of it.
2. If you’re unrecouped, you never see the other half.
Not such an appetizing proposition. But remember that the lm also needs a
synchronization license for the song in the recording. So if you wrote the song

and own the publishing, they now need to make a deal directly with you, and
the song side of the equation looks very di erent in one aspect:
You get much more of the money.
If you have a publisher, they of course take a chunk, and they’ll use it to
recoup any advance. But as we discussed, publishers typically keep 25% or less
(as opposed to the record company’s 50%).

Fees
We discussed the fees for song synchronization licenses on page 252. Make sure
your song fee is most favored nations with the fee paid for the recording.

FILM MUSIC QUIZ
You’re an independent lm company that’s producing a teenage motion
picture. The music supervisor called Capitol Records and got a license to use
the Beatles recording “She Loves You” in the lm, for a payment of $10,000.
The license is fully signed, the money has been paid to Capitol, and the
recording has been dubbed into the lm.
Assuming you’re now aware of everything that’s been done, are there any
problems in going forward and distributing the lm? If so, what?

Answer to quiz:
Here’s what’s wrong: They haven’t licensed the song for the lm, only the
recording. Thus they can’t use the track until they make a deal with the
publisher. (See page 252 if you want a refresher.)
And there’s one other thing that’s wrong: The Beatles haven’t licensed
anything for $10,000 since 1962.

32
Music Supervisors

ROLE
A music supervisor, as the job title implies, coordinates the music for a lm or
TV series. They primarily focus on the choice of songs (music and lyrics),
though they may be involved in the underscore as well.
First, he or she sits down with the producer and director to work out the type
of music they want, ideally before production. If the lm is a musical, or one
that relies heavily on music (such as a dance lm), the music supervisor must be
involved in advance. This is because songs performed on camera have to be
prerecorded, meaning they’re made in a recording studio before the start of
photography of the lm and then lip-synched or danced to on lm. As you can
imagine, it’s di cult to dance to a song not yet recorded.
Actually, I was once involved in a situation where the opposite happened. A
dance scene had been shot to a speci c song, but after the lm was nished, the
writer of the song refused to make a deal with the lm company, so the song had
to be scrapped. A client of mine then wrote a new song for the dance sequence
(obviously having to match the beat precisely), which ended up being a number
one hit.
After meeting with the director and producer, the music supervisor comes
up with suggestions for artists, songwriters, composers, etc., for the lm. The
director and producer decide what they want, then the supervisor works with
the studio’s music department to make the deals happen. He or she contacts the

creative people, arranges for meetings with the lm personnel, and supervises
the recording sessions.
Done properly, being a music supervisor is one of the most di cult jobs on
planet Earth. For example:
1. Other than prerecorded music (which we discussed above, and which is a
tiny fraction of lm music), most of the music can’t be nalized until the
lm is nished (see page 475 for why). The studio has millions of dollars
riding on a speci c lm release date, and music is at best considered a
minor element in the overall production, even if it’s a central element in
the lm. (The cost of a major music budget is maybe a bit over $2
million, while most major studio lms run $40 million to $100 million,
not to mention the multimillions for advertising and marketing. And $2
million is a huge music budget. More typically, music budgets for major
lms run about $500,000 to $1 million.)
2. As we discussed (on page 451), each piece of music in a lm can
represent eight or more deals (see page 452 for what they are), and
because music comes in last, complicated deals have to be made under
enormous time pressure, which geometrically increases the likelihood of
things going wrong.
It’s the music supervisor’s job to keep all these competing interests satis ed
and ensure a happy ending. So good music supervisors are worth their weight in
gold (maybe platinum). They call on their relationships to pull favors, smooth
out di cult situations, and get music into pictures that couldn’t be there any
other way. Music supervisors are in a sense “marriage brokers.” They creatively
marry music and lms, which is no easy process, and they also have to marry the
lm and music industries on a business level (which can be even more di cult).

MOTION PICTURE SUPERVISOR FEES AND
ROYALTIES

Film music supervisors can get fees of $25,000 to $100,000 per picture. For
some very big projects—for example, a live action musical (think Elvis)—they
can work for multiple years (often exclusively for really big projects) and can get
up to $400,000 or more. The top supervisors also have royalties on the
soundtrack album, usually in the range of 1% to 2% non-pro-rated. There may
also be escalations at certain levels of revenue. These royalties are payable
prospectively after recoupment of all costs, at the same time the lm studio
recoups.
If the supervisor is also a record producer, they can get a separate producer
royalty, calculated just like the producer royalties we discussed on page 124. In
addition, there may be box-o ce bonuses based on the picture’s gross, just like
the deals for composers, though those bonuses are challenged (as we discussed
on page 474).

TELEVISION SUPERVISORS
Over the years, a few television shows have licensed extensive amounts of
existing music to create a “cool vibe” for the show. Because of the rushed time
frame in television, and the smaller budgets, and the fact that television
producers’ music departments simply aren’t equipped to deal with the
complicated clearance issues we’ve discussed, this is a seriously tough thing to
pull together.
Stepping in to save the day are music supervisors who work on television
shows. The fees are pretty small—$3,500 to $5,500 for a half-hour episode, up
to maybe $8,000 for an hour. These supervisors also get a record royalty of
about 1%, sometimes success escalations. However, producers that churn out
tons of programs (television production companies and streaming services)
often hire in-house music supervisors to take care of this, and those folks work
for a salary with no royalties.
A recent trend in this area is for music supervisors to troll indie labels, music
blogs, TikTok, SoundCloud, YouTube, and similar sites, looking for unknown
artists with cool material. They then approach the artist or label and say, “We
love your song. We’d like to put it on a TV show, which is a great way to

promote your career. And if you wrote the song, you’ll even get performance
money when it’s aired. Oh, by the way, we pay almost nothing.”
The artists are usually thrilled, because it can mean massive exposure for
their music.

33
Soundtrack Record Deals

As an artist, you have nothing to do with the deal to distribute soundtrack
records—not even consent or consultation. These contracts are made between
the lm company and a record company, and in a sense are “none of your
business.” However, they a ect the types of deals you can make with the lm
company, so you should know about them.
Once the lm company has acquired the bundle of rights we discussed in
Chapters 27 through 31, they turn them over to a record company to put out a
soundtrack album. There are two di erent kinds of soundtrack albums—score
albums and song albums—and the deals are very di erent.

SCORE ALBUMS
A score album, even though it sounds like ght songs at a football game, is an
album wholly of underscore (i.e., with no songs), often because the only music
in the lm is underscore. Unless there’s something extraordinary about the
situation (for example, the lm looks like it’s going to be garganzo), the
soundtrack album deal is relatively modest or, more commonly, nonexistent.
The reason is simple—pure underscore albums don’t usually sell or stream very
well (in the days of sales, anything over ten thousand copies was unusual). The
deal for pure score albums is usually an advance equal to the conversion costs,
though sometimes there is no advance at all (which means the lm company has
to pay the conversion costs, plus re-use fees if the album sells more than the

equivalent of fteen thousand copies, as we discussed on page 480). The royalty
on these albums is usually in the range of 17% to 18%, but it can climb higher
for major event lms. These royalties are “all-in,” meaning they include all the
artists, producers, and anyone else who gets a royalty.

SONG ALBUMS
At the other end of the spectrum is an album of songs by major artists, often a
combination of preexisting songs and songs written for the lm. The deals for
these albums are bigger if (a) the album is nished before they make the record
deal (so the record company can hear it), and (b) the new songs sound like hits.
For these albums, the price escalates dramatically. If a lot of companies are
chasing the deal, song albums can get advances up to $500,000 (sometimes even
more if the record company is really frothing at the mouth), but usually the
advances are in the range of $100,000 to $300,000. (These prices include
conversion costs.) The royalty on song albums is also higher, usually in the
range of 18% to 20%, and sometimes with escalations to 21% and 22% at
sales/streaming levels equivalent to 1 to 2 million albums (United States). More
commonly these days, however, the lm company gets 50% of the record
company’s pro ts.
Usually these deals are made before the music is actually in existence, so the
lm company can use the advance to defray costs. Depending on what everyone
believes the music will be, and to a large degree depending on the reputation of
the lm director or producer (and the director/producer’s prior history with
soundtrack albums), the advances can still be high.
The record company will try to get some marketing requirements from the
lm company (for example, a contribution to promotional videos, screen credit
for the soundtrack album, use of the soundtrack music in ads for the lm, and
so forth). The record company will also want this project to bene t the artists
signed to them, so they’ll require the lm company to use a minimum number
of the label’s artists in the lm (anywhere from one to six tracks, or sometimes
half the recordings used in the lm).

OTHER ISSUES
The other major issues in soundtrack album deals:

Release Timing
The record has to be released in coordination with the lm. The lm company
wants maximum promotion for its lm, and the record company wants
maximum promotion for its record, all from the cross-advertising and crossmarketing of the lm and album, streaming and radio play of the record, etc.
Thus both sides are extraordinarily touchy about delivery and release dates.
If there is an original single, or what’s called a tie-in (meaning a track from
an artist’s upcoming album that’s used in the lm), the lm and record
companies want the track released about six weeks ahead of the lm. This allows
the single to gather steam by the time the lm hits the theaters or makes it
streaming debut. Both the record and lm company want the album released
right around the same time as the release of the lm, or maybe a short time
before.
A major reason for screwing up this ideal timing is the lm company’s
changing its release date, based on a variety of lm-related issues (for example,
they have other lms that are scheduled for release around the same time, the
director isn’t nished, etc.).

Film Release
The record company wants a guaranteed release of the lm. They argue (quite
rightly) that their album isn’t worth much without a lm to go with it. Film
companies are very reluctant to do this, since they never guarantee a lm release
to any of the actors, producers, directors, etc. For some lm companies, it’s an
absolute no-no. For others, they’ll work out some compromise. This is of course
less of an issue with streamers, as they’re going to eventually put the lm on
their service. Otherwise, they end up with a very expensive piece of nothing.

If there’s going to be a theatrical release, the record companies also want to
know how big a release it’s going to be. Will it be a small release, in two
hundred to four hundred theaters, to see how it goes? Or a major release (called
a wide release), on two thousand to four thousand screens? The lm
companies never guarantee a number of theaters, but they’ll give an indication
of what’s happening “o the record.”

Who Owns the Recordings?
There are obviously two choices: the lm company or the record company. The
lm company argues that it paid for the little darlings and thus should own
them. The record company argues that the advance it pays under the
soundtrack album deal pays for the recordings, and thus the record company
should own them. Record companies are particularly touchy about recordings
made by their exclusive artists; they can’t stand the idea of someone else owning
those recordings. So the record companies want to own the recordings and
license them back to the lmmaker, while lm companies want to own them
and license them to the record company.
Compromises run all over the map, but most often the record company
owns the recordings and licenses them to the lm company. Occasionally they
split the ownership—meaning the lm company owns the recordings for the
lm and other non-record rights, while the record company owns them for
phonograph records.
A big issue is control of uses outside the lm, soundtrack album, and singles,
which primarily means synchronization rights (use of the recordings in other
lms, television programs, commercials, etc.). All lm companies will insist
(and the record companies will agree) that the lm company has some level of
control over licensing the recordings for use in other lms, television programs,
advertising, etc. They correctly argue that these usages dilute the lm company’s
right to have the song identi ed exclusively with their movie.
Note, by the way, that if the lm company owns the publishing of any of the
songs, they have a back-door control of the ancillary uses, since the non-record
uses require the publisher’s consent.

Related to the issue of control is the question of who gets the money from
usages outside the lm and records. If the record company ends up with the
rights, then the monies are split between it and the lm company (or credited to
the lm company’s account if unrecouped). If the lm company keeps the
rights, then it usually keeps the money (but not always). Results vary in
proportion to bargaining power.

Videos
Who makes the promo videos and how are the costs recouped? The lm
company almost always supplies lm footage without additional charge. The
real question is whether the lm company pays for part of the videos.

Credit
What type of credit will the record company have in the lm? Will it be in lm
ads as well as on-screen? What credit will the lm company get on the records
and in record company ads?

Advertising
Will either company guarantee advertising of the album and/or the lm?

Marketing
Will the lm company pay any money for marketing, promotion, etc.? Will the
record company? This is heavily negotiated, to make sure each side gets the most
bang out of the other.
Skip to the Conclusion on page 511 unless (a) you were once under (or you’re the
heir to) a really old contract that’s based on the retail price of records, or (b) you
enjoy pain.

Appendix
Ye Olde Royalty Calculations

The following is how royalties were computed up in the olden days. If you were
once under an older recording contract (or you’re the heir to someone who
was), you’ll need to understand how these Byzantine provisions work. But if
you don’t t into that category, feel free to skip to the Conclusion on page 511.
Historically, the artist royalty was a percentage of the suggested retail list
price (also called SRLP). The SRLP had absolutely nothing to do with what
you paid at your local record store. It was just a way to compute royalties.
From this price, the company rst deducted a packaging charge (also called
a packaging deduction or container charge). In theory, this was the cost of
the “package,” and it was deducted because the artist should get a royalty only
on the record, not the package. In reality, it was a charge of much more than
any package actually cost, and thus was just an arti cial way to reduce the artist’s
royalty.
The packaging charge was stated as a percentage of the SRLP, and the
industry norm was 25% for compact discs and other “new con gurations,” 20%
for cassettes, and 10% for vinyl.
The result of this (i.e., the SRLP after deducting the packaging charge) was
called a base price or royalty base. This was the gure against which you
applied your royalty percentage.
Here’s an example of a royalty base computation using easy (not real-world)
numbers:

Retail price of CD
Less: Packaging (25% of $10.00)
ROYALTY BASE

$10.00
– 2.50
$ 7.50

Thus, in this example, if an artist had a 10% royalty, he or she got 75¢ (10%
of $7.50).

Phony Free Goods
If you liked the special campaign and promotional free goods we discussed on
page 84, you’ll positively love the phony free goods that record companies used
when computing royalties based on SRLP.
Before I tell you how this works, you need to know about my soft-drink
stand.
As I mentioned earlier, when I was ten years old, I had a soft-drink stand in
front of our house. I don’t mean a card table with lemonade; I mean a serious
soft-drink stand made out of genuine pine (by my stepfather), with Dr Pepper
and Coca-Cola signs that, if I’d kept them, would be worth more than my rst
car. Anyway, I stumbled on the brilliant idea of delivering soft drinks to the
workmen at a construction site about a block away, using my little wagon.
Instead of selling the drinks for a nickel, like everyone else, I would sell them for
a dime (delivery labor, you know).
But for every two drinks they bought, they’d get two free. (Even though I
thought I was putting one over on the workmen, I have a feeling they really
knew I was selling the drinks for a nickel each and using mirrors.)

Figure 10. The author invents free goods.

My idea for a soft-drink scam was taken to dizzying heights by the early
record company accounting magicians. First, they gured out that selling one
hundred records at 85¢ each was the same as selling eighty- ve records for $1
each and giving the customer fteen “free” records for every eighty- ve they
bought (the retailer gets one hundred records either way, and the company gets
$85 either way). Then they realized that, because fteen of these records were
“free,” they didn’t have to pay the artist for the free records—I mean, how could
you have the gall to ask for royalties on a record for which the company wasn’t
being paid? So by raising the price and giving away records for “free,” the
companies saved royalties on fteen records out of every one hundred while
making the same money. (Remember, the artist’s royalty was based on retail, so
the artist didn’t get any bene t from an in ated wholesale price.) Nifty, eh?
It took the workmen who bought my soft drinks about thirty seconds to
gure out that the price of my drinks was 5¢ each. But it took recording artists
more than twenty years to gure out that these “free” records were hardly free,
because the economics to the company were exactly the same as if all the records
had been sold at a lesser price. Got it?
In the last years of this old system, only a few companies actually gave away
15% of the records they shipped. Where it was done, those “free” records were
known as phony free goods because, like my soft drinks, they were nothing
more than a cute way of discounting the purchase price. (Technically, they were

called standard free goods, or normal distributor free goods.) And in fact
the companies that used this practice charged a higher wholesale price than those
who didn’t, and the di erence (not surprisingly) was the percentage of “free
goods.” (By the way, even though it sounds like you would, you didn’t get more
royalties from the companies without free goods, as we’ll see in a minute.)
Let’s go back to our example:
Retail price of CD
Less: Packaging (25% of $10.00)
ROYALTY BASE

$10.00
– 2.50
$ 7.50

Using a 10% (75¢) royalty, and assuming sales of 100,000 CDs, the artist’s
earnings would be $75,000. However, since the company “gave away” 15% (or
15,000 of the 100,000 units in this example) for “free,” these 15,000 units
didn’t bear any royalties. Thus, the artist was only paid on 85,000 units, and
instead of getting $75,000, the artist only got $63,750 (75¢ × 85,000 units),
which is 85% of $75,000.
As noted before, most of the companies did away with the ction of these
phony free goods. But did you get more royalties? No; instead of free goods,
they only paid on 85% of the sales. So the result was exactly the same as it was
with free goods. It looked like this:
Units shipped
Royalty-bearing percentage
Royalty-bearing units
Times: Royalty
AMOUNT PAYABLE

100,000
× 85%
85,000
× 75¢
$63,750

These normal distributor free goods were in addition to the special campaign
and promotional free goods that were on top of them (we discussed the special
campaign free goods on page 84).

“90% of Net Sales”

In the really early days, records were made of shellac, and were therefore
breakable. So the record companies developed a practice of paying the artist on
only 90% of the shipments, keeping the remaining 10% to cover their breakage.
Records haven’t been made of shellac since the 1950s, but the practice of
paying on 90% of net sales persisted until the late 1990s. There was no logical
reason for this—it was a total rip-o that arbitrarily reduced your royalty by
10%. Thus, where a company paid on 90%, you were being paid on 90% (for
“breakage”) of 85% (for free goods), resulting in payment on only 76.5% of
shipments. And they took special campaign and promotional free goods out of
the balance!
Aren’t you sorry you missed all this fun?
One last tidbit: If you have one of these old deals, there was a time that some
companies applied these crazy calculations to digital downloads. In other
words, they based the price on retail, then took a packaging and free goods
reduction before applying your royalty rate. Even though there is no package
and there are no free goods in the digital world. I understand this has mostly
gone away, but watch out for it.

SimonandSchuster.com
www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Donald-S-Passman
@simonbooks

Also by Donald S. Passman
The Amazing Harvey
The Visionary
Mirage

We hope you enjoyed reading
this Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send
you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your
inbox.

Index
A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print
edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning
of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your
reading system’s search function.
Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations.
AAA (Adult Album Alternative), 184
A&R (artists and repertoire), 70, 124
A&R executives, 124
access (in copyright infringement), 332–33
accounting statements, 133, 161, 164, 167, 173, 188, 202, 210, 228, 301, 308, 313, 371, 394, 403, 480, 487
active rights (360), 106, 188
see also 360 rights
add-ons (in bundled services), 160
administration agreements (publishing), 299, 310–12
co-administration agreements, 309, 312–15, 471
administration fees (publishing), 293, 310
administration rights (publishing), 224–26
advances, 86–89, 98–103
advertising, on television, 160–61
A davit of Incontestability, 383
a liated subpublishers, 293
AFM (American Federation of Musicians), 196, 328
classical music and, 441–42
master licenses and, 495
Music Performance Trust Fund of, 193
Special Payments Fund of, 193, 194
AFTRA (American Federation of Television and Radio Artists), 193–95, 328
agents, 13, 22, 33, 63–66, 104
fees of, 63
how to select, 66
role of, 63, 64, 65, 390–94
term of deal with, 64
territory of, 65–66
AI, see arti cial intelligence

albums, 107
cycles of, 39
late delivery of, 111–15
shifting concept of, 2
soundtrack, 487, 502–6
see also Greatest Hits albums; records
all-in royalties (record deals), 97–98, 131, 456, 460
Alternative radio, 184
American Federation of Musicians (AFM), 196
AMP (Allocation for Music Producers, under the Music Modernization Act), 135
amphitheaters, 400
apps, 259–60
artist royalties and, 154–56
for digital printed music, 273
music instruction and notation, 274
APRA, 244
arenas, 401
ARESA GmbH (Anglo-American Rights European Service Agency), 244
ARPU (Average Rate Per User), 141–42, 143
arti cial intelligence (AI), 143
copyright and, 340–45
artwork, album cover, 192–93
ASCAP (American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers), 230–37, 239, 245, 279, 328
foreign performances and, 264
publishing company setup and, 286–87
“at source,” 95–96, 268–69, 293–94
attorneys, 13, 22, 56–62, 105, 372–73
con icts of interest and, 59–61, 372–73
fees of, 59
how to select, 56–58, 61–62
role of, 56–57
attorney’s fees (in litigation), 339
Audiam, 248
audiovisual recordings, 78–79, 130
audits, auditing, 54–55, 70, 313, 408
cost of, 238
record deals and, 173, 201, 203
average rate per user (ARPU), 141–42, 143
background music, 494
for apps, 154
in motion pictures, 456, 467
in places of business (Muzak), 234, 327, 329
royalties and, 235
for television, 233–34, 253

in TV shows, 488–91
background performers on records, 180, 194
base price (royalty base), 96, 109, 137–39, 168, 507
see also published price to dealers
beat writers, 304
bene cial owners (of copyrights), 331
Berne Convention, 357
BES (business establishment services), 328–29
“best of” albums, see Greatest Hits albums
BIEM (international), 223, 246
big-box retailers, 74–75
billing block, 472
black box monies, 270–71
blanket licenses, 230, 231, 250
BMI (Broadcast Music Incorporated), 230–37, 239, 328
foreign performances and, 264
publishing company setup and, 286–87
Bono, Sonny, see Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act
bonus tracks, 281–82
book value, 371
booth monitor fee, 478
bootleggers, 431, 435
box sets, 162
breakage, 147–49, 251, 295
budget records, 168
bundled services, 260–61
bundles, artist royalties and, 160
Bureau International des Sociétés Gérant les Droits d’Enregistrement et de Reproduction Mécanique
(BIEM), 223
business a airs/legal division, 70
business establishment services (BES), 328–29
business managers, 13, 22, 49–55, 104, 105
checklist for, 51–53
fees for, 53–55
how to select, 50
role of, 49–50, 394
buyout (of leaving band member), 370–71
buyouts (of royalties), 159
cable/satellite services (CABSAT), 329
cable TV, 218
CABSAT (cable/satellite services), 329
CAE number, 287
call-out research, 184–85
Campbell v. Acuﬀ-Rose Music, 338

Canada, 101, 189, 325, 326
royalties and, 138, 222, 280, 423
Canadian Mechanical Rights Reproduction Agency (CMRRA), 237–38
Canadian Recording Industry Association, 280
catalog items, 71, 168
catalog sales, 289–91, 294
catch-all, in songwriter deals, 295
catch-up streaming, 444
CDs (compact discs), 71, 74–75, 77–78, 117, 137, 145, 161–62, 167, 172, 281, 354
artist royalties and, 83, 96
of classical music, 441
future of, 75
mechanical licenses for, 237
reserve limitations and, 167
ceiling (in advance formula), 101–2
Centre National de la Musique (CNM), 146–47
Certi cate of Authorship (C of A), 476
class action, 347, 353–54
classical music, 441–47
advances for, 445–46
marketing tie-ins and, 447
mechanical royalties and, 446
royalties for, 445
term and product and, 443–45
Classics Protection and Access Act, 347–48
clearing, of samples, 262
CMOs, 244
CMRRA (Canadian Mechanical Rights Reproduction Agency), 237–38, 296
co-administration agreements, 309, 312–15, 471
C of A (Certi cate of Authorship), 476
collaborations (on recordings), 152–53, 304–5
collection costs, 38, 296–97
collection deals (publishing), 268
collection period (publishing), 309
Collective Management Organizations (CMOs), 244
collective work (in copyright), 321
commercially satisfactory recordings, 115
commercials, 191, 258, 306, 471
repurposing of, 258
synchronization licenses and, 152
transcription licenses and, 152
commercial webcaster, 328
commissioned works (in copyright), 321
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 321
compact discs (CDs), 71, 74–75, 77–78, 117, 137, 145, 161–62, 167, 172, 281, 354

artist royalties and, 83, 96
of classical music, 441
future of, 75
mechanical licenses for, 237
reserve limitations and, 167
competitive pricing, in ticket sales, 392
compilations (in records), 170, 321
composer agreements, 473–92
credit and, 481
delivery date in, 475–76
exclusivity and, 476
orchestrations and, 477–78
package deals and, 474, 482–87
payment schedule and, 476–77
record royalties and, 478–80
recoupment and, 480
of TV composers, 488–91
video games and, 491–92
composers, 473
comprehensive trademark/service mark search, 377–78
comps (complimentary tickets to concerts), 408
compulsory licenses, 218–19, 312, 328–29
compulsory mechanical licenses, 219–23
conditions required for, 220–22
digital distribution and, 326–30
rst use and, 220
foreign, 222–23, 244
statutory rate and, 221
for streaming, 221, 222, 248
CompuMark, 378
concert webcasts, re-recording restrictions and, 179
conditional downloads, 150
conductor royalties, 478
con icts of interest, 59–61, 372–73
con ict waiver, 373
consent decree, 236
consultation rights, 192, 202, 466, 471
consumer price index (CPI), 221
container charge (packaging deduction), 507
controlled composition (controlled comp) clauses, 118, 275–77
de ned, 276
guest artists and, 154
lyric reprints in, 273, 277
rate per album and, 277, 280–81
rate per song and, 277, 278–80

videos and, 282–83
controlled compositions, 276
conversion costs, 462–63
co-promotions, 457–58
co-publishing agreements, 292, 293
co-publishing deals, 312–15
copyright, 215–23
basic concepts of, 215–16
compulsory licenses and, 218–19
compulsory mechanical licenses and, 219–23
copyright notice and, 354
de ned, 215, 334
duration of copyright, 322–23
exclusive rights and, 216–18
extension rights and, 350–54
how to get, 216
infringement and, 216, 250, 251, 297, 298, 330–42, 355, 373
ownership and, 298–99, 317–19, 331
registering of, 216, 288, 331, 354–56
reversion of, 307–9
right of termination and, 323–24, 348–49
sound recording copyrights, 346–48
term extension act and, 350–54
what is copyrightable and, 216
Copyright Act, 216, 219–20, 221, 240, 248, 276, 317, 320, 321, 326–27, 328, 336–37, 346, 349
of 1909, 216, 218, 219
of 1976, 218, 221, 277, 322, 323, 348, 350, 354
Copyright Alternative in Small-Claims Enforcement Act (CASE Act), 339
Copyright Royalty Board (CRB), 240–42, 327
Copyright Small Claims Court, 339–40
corporation vs. partnership, 373–74
coupling, 170–71
control of, 170–71
royalties on, 170
cover records (covers), 220, 266, 311–12
co-writers, 38, 311
crawl (in motion picture credits), 459, 472
creation (in copyrights), de nition of, 323
creative control, 191–93, 305–7, 428–29
credit, 459, 472, 481, 505
cross-collateralization, 89–91, 89, 190, 205–8, 313–15
crossover artists, 441
cross-registered songs, 235
cue sheets, 233
cutouts (deletes), 169

cuts, 80
D2C (Direct to Consumer) merchandising, 421, 422, 426, 430, 434–36
deadlock, 368
DEAL (Direct European Administration and Licensing), 244
decentralized platforms, 157
deemed royalty (for producers), 130
de cit (red position), 86, 87, 364
delayed discovery, in copyright infringement, 331–32
deletes (cutouts), 169
delivery of albums, late, 111–15
delivery requirements:
in composer agreements, 475–76
in record deals, 115–17
in songwriter agreements, 299–301
de minimis, 332
demos, 162, 297
deposits (for touring agreements), 393–94
derivative works, 217, 351
designer goods, 423
digital downloads, 121, 137, 139, 444
AFTRA and, 193–95
artist royalties and, 83, 96, 149–50
compulsory licenses and, 218–19
distribution of, 209
mechanical licenses for, 237, 239, 248
permanent, 149–50, 239
public-performance royalties and, 232
statutory rate for, 221
tethered, 140, 150
video, 283
digital marketing, 72
digital merchandise, 158–59, 186, 421–22
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 327
Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act (1995), 326–27
digital phonorecord delivery (DPD), see digital downloads
digital print rights, 273–74
digital sales, see digital downloads
digital service providers (DSPs), 71–72, 75, 117, 140, 142, 143, 144–45, 146, 148, 156, 232, 238, 239, 241,
242, 243–46, 248–49, 251, 276, 282, 327, 329, 330, 347–48
digital wallpaper, 186
dilution of streaming revenue, 142
dilution of trademark, 380
DiMA, 241
direct agreements (in record deals), 198

direct sales, 421, 422
Direct to Consumer (D2C) merchandising, 421, 422, 426, 430, 434–36
disaster clause, 108
distress sales, 275, 430
distribution, distributors (records), 217, 254–55
foreign, 163–64, 210–11
independent, 73–74, 73, 74
major, 121–22
distribution deals (records), 94, 209–10
distribution fee (records), 164–65, 209
DIY (do it yourself), 77–78
DLC (downloadable content), 492
DMCA (Digital Millennium Copyright Act), 327
documentaries, 255–56
domain names, 376
registration of, 384–85
double commissions, 44
DPD (digital phonorecord delivery), see digital downloads
draw, in touring, 398
droit moral, 356–57
DSPs (digital service providers), 71–72, 75, 117, 140, 142, 143, 144–45, 146, 148, 156, 232, 238, 239, 241,
242, 243–46, 248–49, 251, 276, 282, 327, 329, 330, 347–48
dumping, 275, 430
DVDs, 79, 283, 444
royalty computations for, 172
dynamic ticketing, 392
E&O (Errors & Omissions) insurance, 52
earnout, in multi-show deals, 413–14
ear picks, 21
e-cards, 274
E-Commerce (web stores), 421, 434–36
editing, 79
educational webcaster, 328
electronic transmission, 139–52
de ned, 139
see also digital downloads; podcasts; streaming; webcasting
Employer Pension Fund (EPF), 193, 194
end title songs, 253, 459
End User License Agreement (EULA), 150
EP (extended play record), 100, 277
EPF (Employer Pension Fund), 193, 194
ephemeral recording, 240
EQ’ing, 79–80
equalizing, 80

equivalency fees, 297
Errors & Omissions (E&O) insurance, 52
Escalations (of record royalties), 97
EULA (End User License Agreement), 150
EUTM registration, 383–84
evergreen catalogs, 290
executive producers (EPs), 125, 128
extension rights (for copyrights), 350–54
fair use (of copyrights), 262, 336–37
fan clubs, 392, 422, 436–37
featured artists, 135, 152–54, 179–80
featurettes, 254
festivals, 255, 398, 409–10, 429, 444
ctitious business-name statement, 288
lms, 191, 321
distributors, 254–55
independent, 254–55
licensing for existing compositions, 497
performance rights and record deals, 459–65
performer deals for, 454–59
public-performance royalties and, 234–35
release, 504
songwriter deals for, 467–72
soundtrack, exclusivity for, 174–77
nal cut, 475
rm albums, 107, 108
rst negotiation right, 104
rst priority:
in bands, 369
in composer agreements, 476
rst to le rule (for trademarks), 384
“ rst use” of a song, 220
compulsory license for streaming, 248
tness apps, 154
xing fee, 283
exing the house, 403
oor:
in advance formulas for publishing deals, 302
in advance formulas for record deals, 101
in composer agreements, 479
in soundtrack royalties, 461
folios, 271–72, 295
foreign distribution (of records), 163–64, 210–11
foreign lyrics, addition of, 305

foreign mechanicals, 222–23, 264–65
foreign registration (of trademarks), 383–84
foreign subpublishing, 264–71
advances and, 267–68
“at source” and, 268–69
black box monies and, 270–71
cover records and, 266
mechanicals and, 264–65
performance monies and, 266–67
performances and, 265
subpublisher charges, 265
translation/adaptation shares and, 269–70
foreign territories
neighboring rights monies in, 325–26
publisher hubs and, 244–46
record royalties and, 137–39, 210–11
formulas, for publishing advances, 302
formulas, for record advances, 101–3
fraction (for producer deals), 129
Fred Ahlert Music Corp. v. Warner/Chappell Music, Inc., 352
free goods, 84
controlled composition clause and, 278–79
phony, 279, 508–10
promotion copies, 84
full price sales, 137
funds (record deals), 98–99
budget problems and, 99–100
options and, 109–10
producers and, 128–29
recording, 113–14
gate, in touring, 398
GEMA (Germany), 230, 244, 246
generative arti cial intelligence, 340
geo- lter, 258
GMR (Global Music Rights), 230, 236, 286–87
goodwill (in trademark), 380
grand rights (grand performance rights), 306–7
Greatest Hits albums, 108, 118–19
royalty computations for, 171
greeting cards, lyrics on, 272–274,
gross sales, in tour merchandise, 423
groups, 361–85
death of member of, 370
de cits and, 364

disability of member of, 370
ex-partners of, 370
rings in, 369
hiring in, 369
quitting of, 369–70
in record deals, 361–64
see also internal group deals
guarantee, in touring, 401–2
guarantee deals, in multi-show touring deals, 413
guaranteed release clauses (for records), 117–18, 121
guest artists, 152–54, 179–80
royalties and, 153–54
hall fees (in merchandising deals), 408, 424–25
hard merchandise, 424
hard tickets, 401
Heritage Acts, 401
holdback, 465
Hot AC (Adult Contemporary), 184
hubbing (in touring), 417
hubs (in foreign publishing), 244, 245–46
ICE Rights, 244
imputed royalty, 130
in-context use, 253, 256
independent promotion, 184–86
independent record companies, 69, 73–74, 98, 119–22
major-distributed, 121–22
true independents, 120
independent record production agreements, 199–208
multi-artist deal, 199, 203–8
single-artist deal, 199–203
inducement letters (side letters), 197–98, 197
infringement, copyright, 216, 250, 251, 297, 298, 330–42, 355, 373
injunction, 339
insurance, E&O (Errors & Omissions), 52
intellectual property, 325
Intent to Use (in trademarks), 380, 382–83
interactive (on-demand) streaming, 140–49, 240–46, 249
Interested Party Information, 287
interludes, 279
internal group deals, 365–74
buyouts and, 370–71
control in, 368
corporation vs. partnership and, 373–74

group name and, 366–67
legal ethics and, 372–73
need for contract and, 365–66
percentages and, 367–68
side projects and, 369
songwriting and publishing issues in, 368
International Classes (of trademark), 381–82
interstate commerce, 380
interviews/promos, 410
in the black, 86
intra-company rate, 163–64
intros, 279
IPI number, 287
itinerary, tour, 391
joint recordings (collaborations), 152–54
joint ventures (in record deals), 208–9
joint work (in copyright), 317–19, 323
jukeboxes, 218
key man clause, 43–44
key members, 361–62
kickers, 468, 487
label deals, 199
multi-artist, 199, 203–8
label service companies, 77
label services deal, 120, 210–11, 444–45
LATAM, 244–45
Latin America, 244–45
lead sheets, 297
lean back, 72
lean in, 72
leaving members, 362–63
legacy artists, streaming royalties and, 96
legal presumption, 356, 381
letter of direction (L.O.D.), 134
library music, 486–87
license income (in record deals), 129
licensing, licenses
blanket, 230, 231, 250
compulsory, see compulsory licenses; compulsory mechanical licenses
master, 493–97
publishing and, 229
synchronization, 252–61

transcription, 252
voluntary, 329
liquidating the reserve, 85, 167
live albums, 108, 116, 119
LLC (Limited Liability Company), 196, 287, 288, 373–74
loan-out companies, 195–96
loan-out deals, 195–98, 196
inducement letters and, 197–98, 197
structure of, 198
L.O.D. (letter of direction), 134
logos, 385
lyricist fees (in lms and other audiovisual product), 485
lyrics, 272–73, 470–71
AI and, 343
lyric videos, 273, 277, 283
mag stock, 485
main titles (in lms and other audiovisual product), 253, 459, 472
main title songs, 459
main title themes (TV), 491
major a liates, 228
major distributors, 73
managers, see personal managers
manufacturing costs, 88, 165
mass merchandisers, 273
masters, 79–80
matching folios, 271, 272
matching right, 104
MDRC (minimum delivery and release commitment), 299–300
Mechanical License Collective (MLC), 249–51
mechanical rights, 219
mechanical royalties, 165, 311, 471
in Canada, 222, 237–38, 280
classical music and, 446
de ned, 219, 237
foreign, 222–23, 264–65
Harry Fox and CMRRA and, 237–38
publishing and, 237–38
see also compulsory mechanical licenses
“Melancholy Baby” case (Shapiro Bernstein v. Vogel), 319
merchandisers, 422–24
merchandising
D2C (Direct to Consumer), 421, 422, 426, 430, 434–36
digital, 156, 158–59, 186, 421–22
retail, 421, 426, 430, 432–33

rights, 186–87
tour, 421–31
metadata, 72, 266
Metaverse, 157, 158–59, 187, 261
MFN, see most favored nation
mid-price records, 168
Mills Music v. Snyder, 351–52
miniseries, 489–90
minting (NFTs), 157
mixed folios, 271
mixed service bundles, 260–61
mixing, mixers, 79, 97, 98, 135–36, 486
mixtapes, 100
MLC (Mechanical License Collective), 249–51, 264, 270, 297
moral rights, 356–57
most favored nation (MFN)
de nition, 257
master license fees and, 494
synchronization and transcription license fees and, 257
motion pictures, see lms
motion picture music, 451–53
see also composer agreements; performer deals, for lms; licensing, licenses
MPTF (Music Performance Trust Fund), 193
multi-artist deals, 199, 203–8
multiple albums, 282
artist royalties and, 161–62
multi-show deals (for touring), 412–14
multitrack recordings, 79, 80
music bundles, 260–61
music editor fees, 485
Music Modernization Act (MMA), 135, 219, 236–37, 248–51, 329, 347–48, 352
and compulsory mechanical license for
streaming, 222, 240, 248
Music Performance Trust Fund (MPTF), 193
music supervisors, 499–501
name (group or individual), 366–67, 375–85
checking if available, 375–79
protecting of, 379–80
registering of, 381–85
rights in, 375–80
national promoters, 395–96
Neighboring Rights, 326, 344
net gross (in touring), 406
net pro ts, computation of,

for records, see pro t share
for touring, 403–5
net publishing share, net publisher’s share 289
net rate, 98, 125–27
net royalty, 98, 460
net subscription amount, 243
NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens), 17, 157–58, 261
new-use fees, see re-use fees
NMPA (National Music Publishers Association), 233, 241
non-commercial webcaster, 328
non-controlled songs, 279–80
non-dramatic musical work, 220
non-exclusive rights, 476
non-interactive players, 151
non-interactive streaming, 150, 239–40
non-interactive webcasting, 150, 195, 328–29
nonreturnable advances, 89
normal distributor free goods, 509
NSAI, 241
objective test (in copyright infringement), 336
“o the top” charges
in publishing deals, 296–97
in record deals, 208
on-demand (interactive) streaming, 140–49, 177, 242–46, 249–50
one-way purchases, 167
on spec, 468
opening acts, 39
optional albums, 107–10
orchestrations, 477–78
orchestrators, 477
original work, in copyrighting, 216
origination costs (merchandising), 429
out-of-context use, 254, 457
outros, 279
outside songs, 279–80
overhead fee (in record deals), 203, 208
override royalty, 118
package deals (in lm and other audiovisual product), 474, 482–87
packages (touring), 390
packaging charge (record deals), 507
packaging deduction (container charge), 507
papering the house, 409
partial reversion (in publishing), 309

partnership vs. corporation, 373–74
passive interest, 106
Patent and Trademark O ce, U.S., 377, 381, 383
pay-or-play provision, 110–11, 468
PEDL (Pan European Digital Licensing), 244
pending and unmatched monies, 249–50
per diem, 482
performance monies, 266–67, 294
performer deals, for lms, 454–59
performing arts centers, 395–96
performing rights, see public-performance rights
performing rights organizations, see PROs
performing rights societies, 230–37
foreign, 265
registering with, 288
see also PROs
permanent downloads, 149–50, 239
personal appearances, 396–97
see also tour, touring
personality folio, 272, 296
personal managers, 13, 22, 33–48, 104, 105
commission for, 34–35
how to select, 46–48
role of, 33–34, 389–90
per-stream basis, artist streaming royalties and, 145–46
per-subscriber minimum (PSM), 144–45, 242, 243, 273–74
apps and, 155
per-user basis, artist streaming royalties and, 145–46
PES (pre-existing subscription services), 329
phonorecords, 219–20, 221
Phonorecords IV agreement, 241
phony free goods, 279, 508–10
pilot presentation (television), 489
pilots (television), 489
pipeline earnings, 301
platform, 16
platform fees, 155
platinum ticketing services, 392, 403
playlists, 72, 76, 119, 140, 156, 170, 185, 241, 328, 464
podcasts, 142, 143, 161, 261
points, 64–66, 83
post-term commission period, 42
post-term reductions for managers, sunset clause for, 42
power of attorney, 45
PPD, see published price to dealers

pre-existing subscription services (PES), 329
premiums, 172
prequels, 457
pre-records (for audiovisual product), 485–86, 499
pre-rolls (in online advertising), 258
pre-sales (of concert tickets), 392–93
presumed access (in copyright infringement), 333
printed (print) music, 271–75, 295
digital, 273–74
folios and, 271–72, 295
royalties for, 271–73
term licenses for, 274–75
prior art (in copyright infringement), 335
private shows, 393
procured cover, 311
producers, 33, 99, 123–36
role of, 123
royalties for, see royalties, producer
production
record company department, 71, 72
in touring, 416
production coordinators, 123
production costs, touring and, 416, 425
product management (record company department), 71, 72
product placement (in videos), 183–84
pro t share (record deals), 162–66, 208–9
promoter pro t deal (for touring), 405
promoters (for touring), 106, 395–96
promotional videos, 182–84
see also videos (single song)
promotion copies (of records), 84
pro-ration, pro-rata royalty, 170, 272, 460, 461, 495
PROs (performance rights organizations), 230–37, 238–39, 247–48, 265, 286–87, 288, 294, 309, 469, 471
prospective escalations, 97
proxy, 233
PRS (United Kingdom), 230, 231, 247, 287
pseudonymous work, 323
PSM, see per-subscriber minimum
publication, de nition of, 323
public distribution (for copyrights), 220–21
public domain, 279, 323, 442, 446
publicity department (of record company), 72
public performance, copyright and, 217
public-performance rights, 229–37
foreign, 265

public-performance royalties, 229–37
blanket licenses and, 230, 231
motion pictures and, 234–35
performing rights societies and, 230–37
published price to dealers (PPD), 83, 96, 150, 193, 222, 273, 283, 296, 442–43, 435, 509
artist royalties and, see royalty base
BIEM and, 223
mid-price records and, 168
publisher’s share, 226, 226, 265, 266, 267, 292, 469
publishing, publishers, 104, 113, 224–51
industry structure of, 225
mechanics of, 227–28
types of, 228–29
puts (in a record label deal), 204
quotes (for publishing licenses), 255
radio, promotion by, 184–85
radio-promoted concerts, 185
ratable, 167
recaps, 257
reciprocal arrangements (for performing rights organizations), 245
record clubs, 172
record companies
independent, 119–22, 69, 73–74, 73, 98, 119–22
major, 69–73, 98–99
record deals, 33, 67–212
see also royalty computations
recording costs, 38, 88, 98, 127, 128–29, 462, 484
recording funds, 113–14
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), 75
recordings, de ned, 79
record one royalties, 125–27
records
de ned, 78–80, 177, 179
see also albums
recoupment, 86–91, 87, 101–2, 127, 308
in composer agreements, 480
in lm performance rights and record deals, 462–64
videos and, 183
referral fees, 52–53
registration
of copyright, 216, 288, 354–56
of domain (website), 384–85
of group or individual name, 381–85

release (of records)
guaranteed, 117–18, 121
release (legal document), 110–11
remixes, 80
Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 334–35
replays, 262
repurpose (of advertising), 257
re-recording restrictions, 178–79, 463
re-scoring, 485
re-sequencing, 191
reserves, 85
limitations on, 167
limiting of, 167
liquidating, 85, 167
residuals (union), 477
retail merchandising, 421, 426, 430, 432–33
retainers, 59
retention period, 308
retroactive to record one royalties, 125
returnable advances, 425–26
return privilege, 84–85, 210
re-use fees (new-use fees), 463, 484
reversion of copyright, 307–9
RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America), 75, 347
riders (touring), 408–10
ringbacks, 171–72, 261
ringtones, 171–72, 221–22, 261
Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization et al. v. UMG Recordings, Inc., and the Farm Club Online, Inc.,
240
Rome Convention, 325–26
R.O.W. (rest of world), 139
royalties
recording artist, 80–85, 94–96, 97–98, 131, 137–39, 242–43, 456
classical music, 445
lm/TV composers, 478–80
foreign territories (for publishing), 264–71
foreign territories (for recordings), 137–39, 210–11
guest artists, 153–54
merchandising, 422–25, 433–34
mixers, 136
music supervisors, 500–501
options and, 109
producer, 97, 98, 124–36
public-performance, see public-performance royalties
retroactive to record one, 125

songwriters, 296–98, 469
soundtrack albums, 460
streaming, electronic transmissions, new technologies (for records), 139–52
videos, 183
royalty base, 96, 109, 137–39, 168, 507
see also published price to dealers (PPD)
SACEM (France), 230, 244, 245
SAG (Screen Actors Guild), 194, 486
SAG-AFTRA, 194–95
SAG-AFTRA Health Plan, 194–95
SAG-AFTRA Industry Sound Recording Special Payment Fund, 194
sales of catalogs, 289–91, 294
sales version (pilot presentation), 489
samples, sampling, 152, 191, 305
licensing of, 262–63, 306
satellite digital audio radio services (SDARS), 328
satellite radio, 195, 233, 327, 328–29
artist royalties and, 151
scale (union), 392
schlock, 169–70
score (underscore), 460–61, 467, 470, 471, 473, 488–91, 502
score albums, 502
scrap, 169–70
Screen Actors’ Guild, see SAG
SDARS (satellite digital audio radio services), 328
SEAs (streaming equivalent albums), 92, 97
secondary market (for concert tickets), 392
sell-o rights, 430
sequels, 457
sequencing (of recordings), 191
service mark, 379
services fee (in label and distribution deals), 208, 209
SESAC, 230, 236, 286–87
set lists, 234
settling the box o ce, 394
sheet music, 271
shelter (in 360 deals), 106
side letters (inducement letters), 197–98, 197
sidelining, 486
sideman performances, 180–81
simulcasts:
concerts, 178
radio stations, 150, 327
single-artist deals, independent production agreements and, 199–203

single-card credit (in lms and other audiovisual product), 459, 472, 481, 491
singles, 184, 280–82, 464
single-song contracts, 299
single-song sheet music, 295
single-song videos, 182–84, 282–83
skins, 159
skip rate, 15, 20
small performance rights, 307
smart contracts, 158
social media, 181–82
marketing through, 72
soft merchandise, 424
soft tickets, 401
SOLAR, 244
songwriter agreements, 292–303
collaboration and, 304–5
creative control and, 305–7
for lms, 467–72
reversion of copyright and, 307–9
royalties and, 296–98, 469
see also term songwriter agreements
Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (1998), 323, 349, 351
sound checks, 406
SoundExchange, 134–35, 151, 154, 195, 326, 328, 329, 348
sound recording copyrights, 346–48
termination of, 352–54
soundtrack albums, 457, 460, 461, 481, 487, 502–6
special campaign free goods, 84
see also free goods
special packages (record deals), 281–82
specialty items, merchandising and, 424
SPF (Special Payment Fund), 193
spin-o s, 457
split point deals (for touring), 405
splits, for touring, 398–99, 400, 401–3, 405–6
sponsorship (for tours), 403, 407
spotting, 475
spotting notes, 485
SRLP (suggested retail list price), 507, 508
standard free goods, 509
start-up costs, touring and, 416, 425
state fairs, 395
statutory damages, 339, 356
statutory rate, 151, 221–22, 278
compulsory mechanical statutory rate, 219–22

STEAs (streaming and track equivalent albums), 92, 97
see also SEAs; TEAs
stems, 80
step deals, 155, 468–69
stock images, 385
stockpile, of merchandise, 275, 430
strategic marketing department (record company), 72–73
streaming, 20, 75, 101, 118, 137, 138, 139, 141–43, 240, 241, 264, 276, 289, 311, 397, 475
artist royalties and, 82–83, 94–96, 137–39
audiovisual, 221, 252, 444
compulsory mechanical licenses and, 221, 222, 248
of concerts, 177, 178, 179
lm and television appearances and, 177
foreign, 82, 244–46
interactive (on-demand), 140–49, 177, 240–46, 249–50
mechanical vs. performance rights in, 238–48
non-interactive, 150, 239–40
paid vs. ad-supported, 140–42
playlists in, 72, 76, 119, 171, 185, 464
promotion by, 185–86
public-performance royalties and, 229–30, 232–34
radio, 177
simulcasts and, 327
statutory rate for, 222
subscription, 2, 83, 94–95
television, 177, 178, 179
union exploitation charges and, 193–95
video, 130, 151–52, 221, 233–34, 246–48, 283
streaming and track equivalent albums (STEAs), 92, 97
streaming equivalent albums (SEAs), 92, 97
streaming services, 18, 70, 73, 144–45, 257–58, 290, 347–48, 488
bundles and, 160, 260–61
release requirements and, 299
see also digital service providers (DSPs)
striking similarity, in copyright infringement, 332
studio albums, 108, 116
sub oor, 102, 303
subjective test, in copyright infringement, 336
sublicensing (in merchandising deals), 432–33, 434
subpublishing agreements, 310
foreign, see foreign subpublishing
subscriptions, streaming, 2, 83, 94–95, 144–47, 150, 151, 160, 241–43, 260, 261, 330
video, 246
substantial similarity, in copyright infringement, 332
su cient creativity, in copyrighting, 216

suggested retail list price (SRLP), 507, 508
sunset clauses, 42
supplementary work (in copyright), 321
swaps, 154
sweetening, 463
sync department (in record company), 71
synchronization licenses, 152, 252–61, 283, 284, 306, 457–58, 471, 497
sync licenses, see synchronization licenses
tangible copy (in copyright), 216
TCC (Total Content Cost), 242
TEAs (track equivalent albums), 92, 97
technically satisfactory recordings, 116
technology cycles, Passman Theory of, 139–40
television, 177, 178, 179, 191, 218, 233–37, 256–57, 396, 412
advertising records on, 160–61
composer agreements and, 488–91
television music supervisors, 501
termination of copyrights, 323–24
term print music licenses, 274–75
term record deals, 111–15
terms (periods of an agreement), 111
term songwriter agreements, 299–303
terrestrial radio, 325
territory, 65–66, 189–90
foreign, 137–39, 244–46
tethered downloads, 140, 150
360 rights, 103–6, 188
record company share of, 104–6
tickets
competitive pricing, 392
complimentary (comps, free), 408–9
dynamic pricing, 392
exing the house, 403
platinum, 392, 403
pricing of, 391–92, 400
riders and, 408–9
sale of, 391–93, 403
VIP, 188, 403, 406, 411, 422
tie-ins, 504
title changes (of songs), 305
TLDs (top level domains), 384
Top 40, 184
top level domains (TLDs), 384
topline (in songwriting), 304

top-line price sales (records), 137
tour managers, 394
tour merchandising, 421–31
advances and, 425–26, 427
advance repayment and, 427
bootleggers and, 431
creative control and, 428–29
exclusivity and, 427–28
hall fees and, 424–25
merchandisers and, 422–24
riders and, 410
royalties and, 422–25
sell-o rights and, 430
term of agreement for, 426–27
tours, touring, 33–34, 105–6, 111, 389–418
cross-collateralization and, 410–12
draw and, 398
expenses and, 399, 404–5
hall fees and, 408
marketing and, 396
of midlevel artists, 400
multi-show deals, 412–14
of new artists, 397–99
public-performance royalties and, 234
riders and, 408–10
roles of team members for, 389–96
splits and, 398–99, 400, 401–3, 405–6
of superstars, 401–6
tour support money for, 38, 187–89
track equivalent albums (TEAs), 92, 97
track producers, 123
tracks, 80, 123
trademark, 379
trademark with goodwill, 380
trailers, 253, 256, 457
transcription licenses, 152, 252
transfer costs, 485
transformative use (in copyright infringement), 337–38
translation/adaptation shares (in publishing), 269–70
translation of a foreign work (copyright), 321
translations, songwriter approval of, 305
2 Live Crew court case, 338
two-track recordings, 80
UGC (user-generated content), video streaming and, 151, 232, 246–47

UMG Recordings et al. v. MP3.com, Inc., 240
unconscious copying (in copyright infringement), 333
underground releases, 100
underscore (score), 460–61, 467, 470, 471, 473, 488–91, 502
union per-exploitation charges, 165, 193–95
union scale, 88
unrecouped balance, 86
upstream deals, 211–12
URLs, 384–85
U.S. basic rate, 137
user-generated content (UGC), video streaming and, 151, 232, 246–47
Value-Added Tax (VAT), 423
value billing, 59
venue deals, 395
venues, 234, 395–96, 400
veri ed fan programs, 392
versus deals, 402
video games:
composer agreements and, 491–92
recording and song licenses to, 156, 258–59
videos (single song), 130, 182–84, 282–83
budget for, 183–84
compulsory mechanical licenses and, 221
controlled composition clauses and, 282–83
control of, 183
history of, 182
lyric videos, 273, 277, 283
performer deals and, 465–66
production costs for, 88
recoupment and, 183
in soundtrack album deals, 505
user-generated (UGC), 246–47
video streaming, 151–52, 233–34, 246–48
on demand, 177, 178, 444
vinyl, 71, 421, 441, 507
VIP Ticketing, 188, 403, 406, 411, 422
virtual concerts, 156, 160
virtual labels, 210–11
vocalist fees (in lms and other audiovisual product), 485
vocal producers, 123
voice tones, 186
voluntary licenses, 220, 327, 329
waive, 59

wallpaper, digital, 186
Walmart, 281
WEA Distribution, 165
Web1, 156
Web2, 156–57
Web3, 63, 156–57, 187
webcasters, 240
webcasting, 150, 152, 174, 178, 179, 195, 328
festival performances and, 409–10
see also streaming, non-interactive
websites, artist, control of in record deals, 181–82
Web Store Sales, 421, 434–36
web stores (E-Commerce), 421, 431–36
wholesale price, see published price to dealers
wide release (motion pictures), 504
Woods v. Bourne Co., 352
works for hire (in copyrights), 319–22
copyright duration and, 323
de nition of, 321–22
in entertainment industry and, 320
termination and, 324
writer’s share, 226, 226, 265, 267, 292, 469, 471
writing teams, 313–15
YouTube, 1, 17, 18, 20, 94, 95, 119, 130, 139, 140, 141, 143–44, 157, 182, 232, 233, 240, 246, 247, 248, 258,
282, 376, 384, 501

Simon & Schuster
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 1991, 1994, 1997, 2000, 2003, 2006, 2009, 2012, 2015, 2019, 2023 by
Donald S. Passman
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof
in any form whatsoever. For information, address Simon & Schuster Subsidiary
Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
This Simon & Schuster hardcover edition October 2023
SIMON & SCHUSTER and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, LLC
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon
& Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For
more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers
Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Jacket design by Alex Camlin
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Passman, Donald S., author. | Glass, Randy, illustrator.
Title: All you need to know about the music business / Donald S. Passman ;
illustrations by Randy Glass.
Description: 11th edition. | New York : Simon & Schuster, 2023. | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2023030458 | ISBN 9781668011065 (hardcover) | ISBN
9781668011072 (ebook)
Classiﬁcation: LCC ML3790 .P35 2023 | DDC 780.23/73—dc23/eng/20230628
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023030458
ISBN 978-1-6680-1106-5
ISBN 978-1-6680-1107-2 (ebook)

